<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [

<!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/">

]>

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>The Acts Of The General Assemblies of the Church of Scotland</title>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="1">Edition 1</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date>May 24, 2009</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">28957</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        Created electronically.
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2009-05-24">May 24, 2009</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>
            Produced by Jordan, David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;.
        </name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
    .smallcaps       { font-variant: small-caps }
  </pgStyleSheet>

  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>  </mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">The Acts</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Of The</p>
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">General Assemblies</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Of The</p>
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">Church of Scotland</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">From The Year 1638 to the Year 1649.</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Inclusive.</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Printed in the Year 1682.</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">To which are now added</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">The Index of the Unprinted Acts of these Assemblies;</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">and the Acts of the General Assembly 1690.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Printed in the year 1691.</p>
    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>

  </front>
<body>

<pb n="i"/><anchor id="Pgi"/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>To The Reader.</head>

<p>
[Transcriber's Note: This 17th-century book was printed in the
typographical conventions and spelling of that time; for instance,
the printed book used the long <emph>f</emph>-shaped glyph for the letter <emph>s</emph>,
it included old spellings such as <emph>Kingdome</emph>, <emph>civill</emph>,
and <emph>publick</emph>, and old words such as <emph>hes</emph>,
<emph>samine</emph>, and <emph>welas</emph>,
and numbers generally are ended with a period.
In this transcription, archaic printing is replaced with modern characters, so
the letter <emph>s</emph> appears as <emph>s</emph>, with the effect that what in
the original book would look like <emph>Minifters</emph> is here transcribed
<emph>Ministers</emph>, but archaic spelling, capitalization, punctuation, and usage are
transcribed as they appeared in the printed book.]
</p>

<p>
It were long, neither do we
now intend, to represent,
what in the beginning, by
the Mercies of our <emph>God</emph> and
Ministry of his faithful
Servants, was the reformation
of this Kirk: what
purity of Doctrine and
Worship, what Order, what Authority, and
what Unity continued for many years, by the
Prayers and Labours of Ministers and Professors,
what Novations and Corruptions have
been introduced upon us of late, in the time of our
Division and Detection, by such as have ever
been enemies to the Cross of <emph>Christ</emph>, and who have
minded earthly things: How manifold and how
comfortable experience we have at this time of
the care and compassions of our <emph>Lord</emph> and <emph>Saviour</emph>
preventing the utter ruine of Religion, and the
horrible vastation of this Kirk, by looking upon the
afflictions of his people, by hearing their groans,
mocked by the World: And by moving the Heart
<pb n="ii"/><anchor id="Pgii"/>
of our gracious and dread Soveraign the Kings
Majesty to conveen a free national Assembly for
redressing the wrongs done to Religion, and what
undeniable testimonies, and notable manifestations
of the divine presence and assistance of
<emph>Christ</emph>, have accompanied this meeting and whole
work. <emph>Who so is wise and observeth these things
will see the loving kindness of the Lord</emph>.
</p>

<p>
For the present it seemed necessary that such of
the Acts and Constitutions of the Assembly as are
of most general concernment should be published in
print; the correct writing of so many Copies as
were called for, not being possible to be exped in due
time, and the Kirk having resolved upon this
course in former times, which, had it been keeped,
our defection through the almost invincible ignorance
of the proceedings of the Kirk, had not proven
so dangerous and deplorable.
</p>

<p>
In these Acts and Constitutions special regard
was had to our <hi rend='italic'>National Confession of Faith</hi>, as
it was at first and diverse times after professed
and is now of late sworn and subscribed, that all
mens minds, who delight not to cavil, might rest
satisfied in the true meaning thereof, found out by
the diligent search of the Ecclesiastick Registers.
Our care was also rather at this time to revive
and bring to light, former laudable Acts, than to
make any new ones, reflecting as little as might
<pb n="iii"/><anchor id="Pgiii"/>
be upon the reformation of other Kirks, and
choosing to receive our directions from our own
<emph>Reformation</emph>, approven by the ample testimony
of so many <emph>Forreign Divines</emph>: according to
the example of the venerable Assembly at <emph>Dort</emph>,
where special caution was, that the 30. and
31. article of the Confession of the <emph>Belgick</emph> Kirks
touching <emph>Ecclesiastick Order</emph> should not be examined
by <emph>Strangers</emph>, there being a <emph>Difference</emph>
touching that point amongst <emph>Reformed Kirks</emph>,
So many as were present can bear witness
that all the <emph>Members of the Assembly</emph> were
many times called on, and required to propone
their <emph>Doubts</emph>, and to give their <emph>Judgments</emph> of every
<emph>Article</emph>, before it was Enacted, that every
one might receive <emph>Satisfaction</emph>, and from the full
perswasion of his mind might give his <emph>Voice</emph>:
Wherin the <emph>Unanimity</emph> and <emph>Harmony</emph> was the
more admirable, that many parting from their
<emph>preconceived Opinions</emph>, which had possessed their
<emph>Minds</emph>, did most willingly receive the <emph>Light</emph>, which
did now unexpectedly appear from the <emph>Records</emph>
of the <emph>Kirk</emph>.
</p>

<p>
That this <emph>Extract</emph> shall stop the <emph>Mouthes</emph> of the
malicious, is more than we can promise, or should
be expected, We know there be some Incendiaries
who would with great joy and content of mind,
seek their lost penny in the ashes of this poor Kirk
<pb n="iv"/><anchor id="Pgiv"/>
and Kingdom: And we have already found, that
our <emph>Laboures</emph> and the grounds whereupon we
have proceeded, before they be seen, are misconstrued
by so many as finds their hopes blasted, and are
come short of their earthly projects: but our comfort
is that we have walked in the truth of our
hearts as in the sight of God, That the Adversaries
of the Kirk have not transformed themselves
into Angels of light, nor can say they are doing
<emph>God</emph> service, but are seen in their colours, and
do seek themselves, and that so many as have erred
before, not knowing the order and constitutions of
this Kirk, will as absent Children to
their mother speaking plainly and powerfully of
old and now after long silence opening her mouth
again, and uttering her mind in a free Assembly,
hear her voice, and with that reverence that
beseemeth under the supreme Majesty of <emph>Christ</emph>,
obey her directions, that being all of one mind,
peace may be upon us, and upon the Kirk of <emph>God</emph>;
and the <emph>God</emph> of peace, and love may be with us.
1639.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="001"/><anchor id="Pg001"/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>The General Assembly, At Glasgow.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Act Sess. 6. November 27. 1638.</head>

<p>
The testimony of the Committy
for tryall of the Registers,
subscribed with
their hands, being produced,
with some reasons
thereof in another paper,
and publickly read; <hi rend='italic'>My
Lord Commissioner</hi> professed
that it had resolved him of
sundry doubts, but desired
a time to be more fully
resolved.
</p>

<p>
The Moderatour desired that if any of the Assembly had
any thing to say against the said testimonie for the books,
that they would declare it, and finding none to oppon, yet
be appointed the day following, to any to object any thing
they could say; and if then none could object the Assembly
would hold the Registers as sufficient approven.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="002"/><anchor id="Pg002"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Act. Sess 7. November 28.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act. approving the Registers.</hi></head>

<p>
Anent the report of the Assemblies judgement of the authority
of the books of Assembly; The Moderatour having
desired that if any of the Assembly had any thing to say,
they would now declare it, otherwise they would hold all approved
by the Assembly.
</p>

<p>
The Commissioner his Grace protested that the Assemblies
<hi rend='italic'>approving these books, or any thing contained in them</hi> be no wayes
prejudicial to his Majestie, nor to the Archbishops, and
Bishops of this Kingdome, or any of their adherents; because
he had some exceptions against these books. My
Lord <hi rend='italic'>Rothes</hi> desired these exceptions to be condescended on,
and they should be preferably cleared, and protested that
these books should be claimed authentick and obligatorie
hereafter.
</p>

<p>
The whole Assembly all in one voice approved these
books, and ordained the same to make faith in judgement,
and out with, in all time commitit, as the true and authentick
Registers of the Kirk of Scotland, conform to the testimonie
subscribed by the Committie, to be insert with the
reasons thereof in the books of Assembly: Whereof the tenour
followeth.
</p>

<p>
We under-subscribers, having power and commission
from the generall Assembly now presently convened,
and sitting at <hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi>, to peruse, examine and cognosce
upon the validity, faith and strength of the books and registers
of the Assembly under-written, to wit: A register
beginning at the Assembly holden the twentie day of <hi rend='italic'>December</hi>
1566. and ending at the fourth session of the Assembly
held in the 28 of <hi rend='italic'>December</hi> 1566.
</p>

<p>
Item another register beginning at the generall Assembly,
holden the second day of June 1567. and ending at the
fourth session of the Assembly holden at <hi rend='italic'>Perth</hi> the ninth day
of <hi rend='italic'>August</hi> 1572, which register is imperfect, and mutilate
in the end, and containeth are no leaf nor page after that
page which containeth the said inscription of the said fourth
session, which two registers bears to be subscribed by <hi rend='italic'>John
Gray</hi> scribe.
</p>

<pb n="003"/><anchor id="Pg003"/>

<p>
Item a register of the Assembly holden at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi> the
seventh day of <hi rend='italic'>August</hi> 1574, and ending with the twelfth
session, being the last session of the Assembly 1579.
</p>

<p>
Item another register beginning at the Assembly holden
at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi> the tenth of <hi rend='italic'>May</hi> 1586. and
ending in the seventeenth
session of the Assembly holden in <hi rend='italic'>March</hi>, 1589.
</p>

<p>
Item another register being the fifth book, and greatest
volume, beginning at the Assembly holden in <hi rend='italic'>Anno</hi> 1560,
and ending in the year 1590.
</p>

<p>
Having carefully viewed, perused and considered the
first registers, and every one of them, and being deeply and
maturely advised, as in a matter of greatest weight and consequence,
do attest before God, and upon our conscience declare
to the world and this present Assembly, that the saids
foure registers above expressed, and every one of them, are
famous, authentick and good registers: which ought to be
so reputed and have publick faith in judgement and out with
ad validem it the records in all things, and that the said fifth &amp;
greatest book, beginning at the Assembly 1560. and ending
1590. being by the hand writs of the Clerk,
cognosced, and tryed, and agreeable
to the other four registers, in what is extant in them,
ought be free of all prejudice and suspicion, and received
with them. And in testimonie of our solemne affirmation,
we have made these presents with our hands.
</p>

<p>
Subscribitur,<lb/>
Master Andrew Ramsay.<lb/>
Master John Adamson.<lb/>
Master John Row.<lb/>
Master Rohre Murray.<lb/>
Master Alexander Gibson.<lb/>
Master James Boner.<lb/>
Master Alexander Peerson.<lb/>
Master Alexander Wedderburn.
</p>

<pb n="004"/><anchor id="Pg004"/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Reasons prooving the five Books and Registers
produced before the Assembly to be authentick</hi>.
</p>

<p>
The books now exhibited unto us underscribers, which
we have revised and perused by commission from the
generall Assembly, are true registers of the Kirk: to wit,
Five Volumes, whereof the first two contain the acts of the
Assembly, from the year of God 1560. to the year 1572.
all subscribed by <hi rend='italic'>John Gray</hi> Clerk. The third from the year
of God 1574. to the year 1579. The fourth from the year
of God 1586. to the year 1589. At which time <hi rend='italic'>Master
James Richie</hi> was Clerk, who hath frequently written upon
the margine of the saids two last books, and subscribed the
said margine with his hand-writing. And the fifth book
being the greatest Volume, containing the acts of the generall
Assembly, from the year of God 1560. to the year 1590.
which agreeth with the foresaids other foure books and registers,
in so far as is extant in them, and further recordeth,
what is wanting by them, passing by what is mutilate
in them, and which with the two Volumes produced by
<hi rend='italic'>Master Thomas Sandilands</hi> from the year 1590. to this present,
maketh up a perfect register.
</p>

<p>
I. For the first two Volumes subscribed by <hi rend='italic'>Ionn Gray</hi>, albeit
it be not necessar in such antiquietie to proove that he
was Clerk, seeing he designes himself so by his subscription,
yet the same is manifest by an act mentioned in the third
book, in the time of <hi rend='italic'>Master James Richie</hi>, who succeeded
him in the said office, and his hand-writ was acknowledged
by sundry old men in the ministery.
</p>

<p>
II. The uniformitie of his subscriptions through both
Volumes, evident by ocular inspection above the ordinarie
custome of most famous Notars, delivers the same from all
suspicion <hi rend='italic'>in facto tam antiquo</hi>.
</p>

<p>
III. There be many coppies, specially of general acts,
yet extant, which do not debord from the saids registers, but
are altogether agreeable thereto.
</p>

<p>
IV. It is constant by the universal custome of this Kingdome,
that all registers are transmitted from one keeper to
<pb n="005"/><anchor id="Pg005"/>
his successour; and so comming by progresse and succession
from the first incumbent to the last possessour, are never
doubted to be the registers of that judicatorie, whereof the
last haver was Clerk; and therefore it is evident, that these
books comming successfulie from <hi rend='italic'>John Gray</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Master James Richie</hi>, and
<hi rend='italic'>Master Thomas Nicolson</hi>, who were all Clerks to
the Assembly, into the hands of <hi rend='italic'>Master Robert Winrame</hi>,
who was constitute Clerk depute by the said <hi rend='italic'>Master Robert
Nicolson</hi> (as his deputation here present to show, will testifie)
are the undoubted registers of the Assembly: like as
<hi rend='italic'>Alexander Blair</hi> succeeded the said
<hi rend='italic'>Master Robert</hi> in his place of
Clerkship to the assignations and modifications of Ministers
stipends; and during <hi rend='italic'>Master Robert</hi> his life-time, was his
actual servant, and so had the said books by progresse from
him, which the said <hi rend='italic'>Alexander</hi>'s readie presently to testifie.
</p>

<p>
V. The two registers of <hi rend='italic'>Master James Richie</hi>, albeit not
under his own hand, yet are frequently margined with his
own hand-writ, and the same marginal additions subscribed
by him, which hand-writ is seen and cognosced by famous
men, who knoweth the same, and it is evident, being
compared with his several writings and subscriptions yet
extant.
</p>

<p>
VI. The said registers are more perfect, lesse vitiated,
scored, and interlined, then any other authentick and famous
registers of the most prime judicatories within this
Kingdom:
</p>

<p>
VII. <hi rend='italic'>Master Thomas Sandilands</hi>, in name of his father, who
was late Clerk by dimution of <hi rend='italic'>Master Thomas Nicolson</hi>, hath
produced a Volume, which proveth the saids two registers
of <hi rend='italic'>Master James Richie</hi> to be sufficient records; because that
same Volume is begun by that same hand, whereby the said
<hi rend='italic'>Master James Richie</hi> his registers are written, and is subscribed
once in the margine by <hi rend='italic'>Master James Richie</hi> his hand, and
followed forth, and continued in the same book by <hi rend='italic'>Master
Thomas Nicolson</hi>, who succeeded him in the place, and was
known by most men here present to be of such approven
worth and credit, that he would never have accomplished
a register which had not been famous and true: and whereof
the hand-write, had not then been known to him sufficiently.
</p>

<pb n="006"/><anchor id="Pg006"/>

<p>
VIII. That register produced by <hi rend='italic'>Master Thomas Sandilands</hi>,
and prosecuted by <hi rend='italic'>Master Thomas Nicolson</hi>, proves
the first part of that register to be true and famous, and that
first part being by ocular inspection of the same hand writ,
with <hi rend='italic'>Master James Richies</hi> registers, and subscribed in the
margine with the same hand writ, proveth <hi rend='italic'>Richies</hi> two
books to be good records, and <hi rend='italic'>Richies</hi> registers doth approve
<hi rend='italic'>Grays</hi> books by the act of Assembly before written: specially
considering the same hath come by progresse and succession
of Clerks, in the hands of <hi rend='italic'>Alexander Blair</hi>, now living, and
here present.
</p>

<p>
IX. The compts anent the thirds of benefices between the
Regent for the time, and the Assembly, in the second volume,
pag. 147. are subscribed by the Lord Regents own
hand, as appeareth: for it is a royall-like subscription, and
there is no hand writ in all the book like unto it, and beareth
not <hi rend='italic'>Sic subscribitur</hi>, which undoubtedly it would do,
if it were a coppie.
</p>

<p>
X. <hi rend='italic'>Master Iames Carmichell</hi> was commanded by the generall
Assembly 1595, Sess. 9, in the book produced by <hi rend='italic'>Master
Thomas Sandilands</hi>, to extract the generall acts forth of
their books; and it is evident that these books are the same
which he perused for that effect, because he hath marked
therein the generall acts with a crosse, and hath designed the
act by some short expression upon the margine, which is
cognosed and known to be his hand writ, by famous and
worthy persons: which is also manifest by the said <hi rend='italic'>Master
James</hi> his hand and subscription, written with his own hand
in the last leafe of the said books; as also acknowledged in
the said book, produced by <hi rend='italic'>Master Thomas Sandilands</hi>, wherein
the said <hi rend='italic'>Master James Carmichell</hi> granteth the receipt of
these, with some other books of the Assemblies.
</p>

<p>
XI. The registers produced, are the registers of the Assembly,
because in <hi rend='italic'>Anno</hi> 1586, the Assembly complaineth that
their registers are mutilate: which hath relation to <hi rend='italic'>Richies</hi>
third book, which is lacerat and mutilate in divers places
without any interveening of blank paper, or any mention of
<hi rend='italic'>hic deese</hi>.
</p>

<p>
XII. If these were not principall registers, the enemies of
<pb n="007"/><anchor id="Pg007"/>
the puritie of Gods worship, would never have laboured to
destroy the same which notwithstanding they have done; as
appeareth by the affixing and battering of a piece of paper
upon the margine, anent a condition of the commission not
to exceed the established discipline of this Kirk; subscribed
by the Clerk, book 3, pag. 147, and the blotting out the certification
of the excommunication against Bishop <hi rend='italic'>Adamson</hi>,
book 4, pag. 30, who in his Recantation generally acknowledgeth
the same: but which, without that recantation,
cannot be presupposed to have been done, but by corrupt
men of intention to corrupt the books, which were not
necessary, if they were not principall registers.
</p>

<p>
XIII. In the Assembly 1596, the Church complained
upon the Chancelour his retention of their registers, &amp; desired
they might be delivered to their Clerk, which accordingly
was done; as a memorandum before the beginning of the first
book, bearing the redeliverie of these foure books to <hi rend='italic'>Master
James Richie</hi>, clerk proporteth; which clearly evinceth
that those foure books are the registers of the Assembly.
</p>

<p>
XIV. The said fifth book and greatest Volume, is also
marked on the margine, with the hand-writ of the said <hi rend='italic'>Master
James Carmichell</hi>; (which is cognosced) who was appointed to
peruse the books of the Assembly as said is, and would not
have margined the same by vertue of that command, nor
extracted the general acts out of it, if it were not an approbation
therof, as an authentick and famous book.
</p>

<p>
XV. The said fifth Volume doth agree with the other
foure books; in all which is extant in them, and marketh
the blanks, which are lacerate and riven out of the same;
and compleateth all what is lacking in them.
</p>

<p>
XVI. In the book of Discipline pertaining to <hi rend='italic'>Master
James Carmichel</hi>, superscribed by himself, and <hi rend='italic'>Master James
Richie</hi>, there are sundry acts and passages quoted out of the
said fifth great Volume, saying, It is written in such a page
of the book of the Assembly, which agreeth in subject and
quotation with the said fifth book, and cannot agree with
any other; so that <hi rend='italic'>Master James Carmichel</hi> reviser of the Assembly
books, by their command, would not alledge that
book, nor denominate the same a book of the Assembly, if
it were not an authentick famous book.
</p>

<pb n="008"/><anchor id="Pg008"/>

<p>
XVII. Though the corrupt nature of man hath been
tempted to falsifie particular evidents, yet it hath never been
heard that any whole register hath ever been counterfeited;
neither can it bee presupposed that any will attempt that high
wickednesse, seeing the inducements anwerable to that
crime, can hardly be presupposed.
</p>

<p>
XVIII. It is certain, and notour to all these who are
intrusted with the keeping of the publick records of the
Kingdome, that the same are never subscribed by the
Clerk, but only written and filled up by servants, and
most frequently by unknown hands, yet they and the extracts
thereof make publick faith, and the same are uncontrovertedly
authentick registers; and when the most publick
registers of the Kingdom shall be seen, and compared with
these registers of the Assembly, it shall be found that these
other registers of the most soveraigne judicatories ever unsubscribed
are more incorrect, oftner margined, scored,
and interlined, made up by greater diversitie of unknown
hand writs, than these books of the Assembly, which by
special providence are preserved so intire, that in the
judgement of any man acquainted with registers, they will
manifestly appear at the very sight to be true, famous, and
authentick.
</p>

<p>
XIX. The fame and credit of ancient registers in this
Kingdome, is so much reverenced that if any extract be
different or discontinuous from the register, that extract albeit
subscribed by the person who for the time had been of
greatest eminence in the trust of registers, will be rectified,
conform to the register, and have no force, so far as it debordeth
therefrom; although the registers be written with
an obscure, unknown hand, and unsubscribed.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Act. Sess. 12. December fourth.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>The six late pretended Assemblies condemned.</hi></head>

<p>
Anent the report of the Committie, for trying the six last
pretended Assemblies: They produced in writ sundrie
reasons, clearing the unlawfulnesse and nullitie of these Assemblies;
<pb n="009"/><anchor id="Pg009"/>
which were confirmed by the registers of the Assembly,
the books of Presbyteries, the Kings Majesties
own letters, and by the testimonie of divers old reverend
Ministers, standing up in the Assembly, and verifying
the truth thereof. The Assembly with the universall consent
of all, after the serious examination of the reasons against every
one of these six pretended Assemblies apart, being often
urged by the Moderatour, to informe themselves thoroughly,
that without doubting, and with a full perswasion of minde,
they might give their voices, declared all these six Assemblies
of <hi rend='italic'>Linlithgow</hi> 1606. and 1608,
<hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi> 1610, <hi rend='italic'>Aberdeen</hi>
1616, St. <hi rend='italic'>Andrews</hi> 1617,
<hi rend='italic'>Perth</hi> 1618. And every one of them
to have been from the beginning unfree, unlawfull, and
null Assemblies, and never to have had, nor hereafter to
have any Ecclesiasticall authoritie, and their conclusions to
have been, and to bee of no force, vigour, nor efficacie:
Prohibited all defence and observance of them, and ordained
the reasons of their nullitie to be insert in the books of the
Assembly: <hi rend='italic'>Whereof the tennour followeth.</hi>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Reasons annulling the pretended
Assembly, holden at</hi> Linlithgow, 1606.</head>

<p>
I. From the indiction of it. It was indicted the third of
<hi rend='italic'>December</hi> to bee kept the tenth
of <hi rend='italic'>December</hi>. And so
there was no time given to the Presbyteries, far distant,
neither for election of Commissioners nor for preparation
to those who were to be sent in Commission. The shortnesse
of the time of the indiction is proved by the Presbyterie
books of <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Perth</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>Hadingtonn</hi>, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
II. From the want of a lawfull calling, to these who went
to the meeting, seeing they were not at all elected by their
Presbyteries, but were injoyned to come by the Kings letters.
This also is proved by the foresaids books of the Presbyteries,
and by his Majesties letters.
</p>

<p>
III. From the nature of that meeting, which was only a
private meeting, or convention, for consultation to be
taken by some persons of sundry estates written for, as the
<pb n="010"/><anchor id="Pg010"/>
Kings letters and the Presbyterie books do acknowledge.
</p>

<p>
IV. From the power of those ministers who were present.
Their Presbyteries did limitate them: First, That they
should give no suffrages in that meeting as a generall Assembly.
Secondly, That they agree to nothing that may any
wayes be prejudiciall to the acts of the generall Assemblies,
or to the established discipline of the Kirk. Thirdly, That
they should not agree to resolve or conclude any question,
article, or mater whatsoever, the decision whereof is pertinent,
and proper to a free generall Assembly. Fourthly,
If any thing be concluded contrary thereunto, that they protest
against it. These limitations are clear by the Presbyterie
books.
</p>

<p>
V. The acts of this meeting were not insert in the book
of Assemblies, as is evident by the register.
</p>

<p>
VI. The next pretended Assembly at <hi rend='italic'>Linlithgow</hi>, 1608,
doth acknowledge the Assembly, Whereof <hi rend='italic'>Master Patrick
Galloway</hi> was Moderatour, to have been the last immediate
Assembly, preceding it selfe: and that Assembly whereof
he was moderatour, was the Assembly holden at <hi rend='italic'>Halyroodhouse</hi>,
1602. So they did not acknowledge that meeting at
<hi rend='italic'>Linlithgow</hi>, 1606. for any Assembly at all. This is clear
by the registers of the Assembly, 1608, in the entrie
thereof.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Reasons for annulling the pretended
Assembly at</hi> Linlithgow, 1608.</head>

<p>
I. Manie of the voters in that pretended Assembly had
no lawfull commission from the Kirk, to wit, 42
Noble men, officers of state, councellours, and Barrons,
also the Bishops, contrare to the act of <hi rend='italic'>Dundie</hi>, 1597. And
one of their caveats, the Noble men, were as commissioners
from the King, the Bishops had no commission at all
from the Presbyterie, for every Presbyterie out of which
they came, had their full number of Commissioners beside
them, as the register of the Assembly beareth.
</p>

<pb n="011"/><anchor id="Pg011"/>

<p>
II. In a lawfull Assembly there should be none but Commissioners
from Presbyteries, Burghs, and Universities,
and but three ministers at most, with one Elder, Commissioners
from every Presbyterie, according to the act made
at <hi rend='italic'>Dundie</hi>, 1597. But in that pretended Assembly, there
were foure ministers from the severall Presbyteries, of <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>,
and <hi rend='italic'>Cowper</hi>, five from the
Presbyteries of <hi rend='italic'>Arbroth</hi>,
as the roll of the said pretended Assembly beareth, whereas
there were no ruling Elders sent from Presbyteries, according
to the book of policie and act of <hi rend='italic'>Dundie</hi>.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Reasons for annulling the pretended
Assembly at</hi> Glasgow, 1610.</head>

<p>
I. The Commission of the pretended Commissioners to
the meeting was null. 1. Because the election of them
was not free, seeing they were nominate by the Kings Letters,
as the Presbyterie books of <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh, Perth</hi>, and
<hi rend='italic'>Hadingtoun</hi> declare.
And the Bishop of St. <hi rend='italic'>Andrews</hi> in his
letter to some Presbyteries required them to send such
commissioners as the King had nominate: assuring them,
that none other would be accepted. This the Bishops letter
registered in the Presbyterie books of <hi rend='italic'>Hadingtoun</hi> doth
cleare. 2. And whereas there were no ruling Elders sent
from the Presbyteries to that pretended Assembly, as the
roll of Commissioners sheweth; yet there were moe ministers
from undue severall Presbyteries then three, as five
from <hi rend='italic'>Brechen</hi>, five from
<hi rend='italic'>Arbroth</hi>, five from <hi rend='italic'>Kirkenbright</hi>,
seven from the Presbytery of <hi rend='italic'>Argyl</hi>, foure from the Presbyterie
of <hi rend='italic'>Cowper</hi>, foure from
<hi rend='italic'>Linlithgow</hi>, foure from <hi rend='italic'>Pasley</hi>,
foure from <hi rend='italic'>Hammilton</hi>, foure from
<hi rend='italic'>Drumfreis</hi>, foure from
<hi rend='italic'>Dunkell</hi>: as the register of that Assembly beareth.
</p>

<p>
II. There where thirtie voters of Noble men and Barrons,
beside the pretended Bishops, who had no commission from
any Presbyterie. In the fourth Session of this pretended Assembly
it is plainly said, That the Noble men and Barrons
came to it by the Kings direction.
</p>

<pb n="012"/><anchor id="Pg012"/>

<p>
III. The voting of the commissioners was not free: for
by the Kings Letter to the Assembly they were threatned,
and it was declared that their content was not needfull to any
act to be made there: The King might doe it by his own
power, yet they were allured to vote by a promise that their
good service in so doing should be remembred and rewarded
thereafter.
</p>

<p>
IV. The principall acts which were made, were set down
<hi rend='italic'>verbatim</hi> in the privie conference, which chiefly consisted of
the Kings Commissioners and pretended Bishops, and only
read to be ratified in the Assembly.
</p>

<p>
V. Sundrie ministers then present, doe now declare, that
they knew the ministers who voted the wrong way, to have
received their present reward, and that money was largely
dealt unto them.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Reasons for annulling the pretended
Assembly at</hi> Aberdene, 1616.</head>

<p>
I. There was no election of a Moderatour: but that place
usurped by the pretended Bishop of Saint <hi rend='italic'>Andrews</hi>, as
the Register beareth.
</p>

<p>
II. The indiction of that pretended Assembly was but
twentie dayes before the holding of it: so that the Presbyteries
and burghes could not be prepared for sending their
commissioners: which caused the absence of many Presbyteries
and fourtie foure Burghes.
</p>

<p>
III. There were twentie five noble-men, and gentle-men
voters without commission from the Kirk. Ma. <hi rend='italic'>William
Struthers</hi> voted for the Presbyterie of <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, yet had no
commission there-from. The commission being given by
that Presbyterie to other three, as the said Commission registrar
in the books of the Presbytery beareth. And whereas
there should be but one Commissioner from every burgh,
except <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, to the Assembly; at this pretended Assembly,
there were two Commissioners from <hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi>, two
from <hi rend='italic'>Cowper</hi>, two from St.
<hi rend='italic'>Andrews</hi>: whereas there were no
ruling Elders having commission from their Presbyteries at
that Assembly.
</p>

<pb n="013"/><anchor id="Pg013"/>

<p>
IV. When the acts of that pretended assembly were written,
the Bishop of St. <hi rend='italic'>Andrews</hi> with his own hand did interline,
adde, change, vitiate, direct to be extracted or not
extracted, as he pleased: as the scrolls themselves seen, doe
show; wherefore the Clerk did not registrat the acts of that
Assembly, in the books of Assemblies, as may be easily seen
by the blank in the register left for them remaining
unfilled.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>The nullitie of the pretended Assembly
at</hi> Saint Andrews, 1617.</head>

<p>
I. There is no mention of it in the register of the Assemblies,
and so no warrand for their commissions, their
Moderatour or Clerk.
</p>

<p>
II. The indiction of it was so unformall, that as the scroll
declareth, a great part of the Commissioners from Synods,
Burrows, and gentle-men, would not be present.
</p>

<p>
III. The Kings Majestie in his letter to <hi rend='italic'>Perths</hi> Assembly,
acknowledged it was but a meeting, wherein disgrace was
offered to his Majestie.
</p>

<p>
IV. The former corruptions of the foure preceding Assemblies
had their confluence in this and the subsequent Assembly.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Reasons for annulling the pretended
Assembly, holden at</hi> Perth, 1618.</head>

<p>
I. The Assembly was indicted but twentie dayes before
the holding of it: and all parties requisit received
not advertisement, as appeareth by their absence. The
untimous indicting of it, is cleared by Presbyterie
books.
</p>

<p>
II. There was no election of the Moderatour, as was
accustomed to be in lawfull Assemblies; The register cleareth
this.
</p>

<pb n="014"/><anchor id="Pg014"/>

<p>
III. No formall election of their new Clerk.
</p>

<p>
IIII. There were five whole Dioces absent, viz. <hi rend='italic'>Orknay</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Cathnes</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Rosse</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Argyll</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>Isles</hi>: and many Presbyteries
had no Commissioners there, as the register of that
pretended Assembly beareth.
</p>

<p>
V. There were nineteen noblemen and Barrons, eleven
Bishops that had no Commission from the Kirk. Whereas
the act for constitution of Assemblies, ordaineth every
Burgh to have but one Commissioner, except <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>,
which may have two (Act at <hi rend='italic'>Dundie</hi> 1597) yet in that pretended
Assembly, <hi rend='italic'>Perth</hi> had three Commissioners,
<hi rend='italic'>Dundie</hi>, had two, <hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi> had two,
and <hi rend='italic'>St. Andrews</hi> had two: Of
the Burghes, there were there six absent: And for ruling
Elders, there were none at all with commission from their
Presbyteries. All these things are cleared by the records of
that pretended Assemblie.
</p>

<p>
VI. The Commissioners from some Presbyteries exceeded
their numbers prescribed in the act at <hi rend='italic'>Dundie</hi>, 1597,
for the Presbyterie of <hi rend='italic'>Arbroth</hi> were foure Commissioners and
three for the Presbyterie of <hi rend='italic'>Aughterardour</hi>: Beside these that
were heard to vote, having no commission at all, and some
who had commission were rejected, and were not enrolled,
but others put in their place without commission.
</p>

<p>
VII. The pretended Bishops did practice foure of the articles
to be concluded there, before the pretended Assembly,
in <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>St. Andrews</hi>,
and other cathedral Churches,
by keeping festival dayes, kneeling at ye Communion. Thus
their voices were prejudged by their practice of these services
before condemned by the Kirk, and therefore they should
have been secluded from voicing.
</p>

<p>
VIII. In all lawfull Assemblies, the voicing should be
free: But in this pretended Assembly there were no free
voicing; for the voicers were threatned to voice <hi rend='italic'>affirmative</hi>,
under no lesse pain nor the wrath of authoritie, imprisonment,
banishemnt, deprivation of ministers, and utter
subversion of the state: Yea, it was plainly professed, that
neither reasoning nor the number of voices should carie
the matter away: Which is qualified by the declaration
of many honest old reverend Brethren of the ministery now
present.
</p>

<pb n="015"/><anchor id="Pg015"/>

<p>
IX. In all lawful Assemblies, the grounds of proceeding
were, and used to be, the word of God, the confession of
Faith, and acts of former general Assemblies. But in this
pretended Assembly, the ground of their proceeding in
voicing was the Kings commandment only: For so the question
was stated: <hi rend='italic'>Whether the five articles, in respect of his Majesties
commandement, should passe in act, or not</hi>: As the records
of that pretended Assembly beareth. Where it is declared,
that for the reverence and respect which they bear
unto his Majesties Royal commandements, they did agree
to the foresaids articles.
</p>

<p>
X. Many other reasons verifying the nullitie of all these
Assemblies, were showen and proven before the Assembly,
which needeth not here to be insert.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Act. Sess. 13. December 5. 1638.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Against the unlawfull oaths of intrants.</hi></head>

<p>
The six Assemblies immediately preceeding, for most
just and weightie reasons above-specified, being found to
be unlawful, and null from the beginning: The Assembly
declareth the oathes and subscriptions exacted by the Prelates
of the intrants in the ministerie all this time by past
(as without any pretext of warrand from the Kirk, so for
obedience of the acts of these null Assemblies, and contrare
to the ancient and laudable constitutions of this Kirk, which
never have been nor can be lawfully repealled, but must
stand in force) to be unlawful, and no way obligatorie.
And in like manner declareth, that the power of Presbyteries,
and of provincial and general Assemblies, hath been
unjustly surpressed, but never lawfully abrogate. And therefore
that it hath been most lawful unto them, not withstanding
any point unjustly objected by the Prelats to the contrare,
to admit, suspend, or deprive ministers, <hi rend='italic'>respectivè</hi> within their
bounds, upon relevant complaints sufficiently proven; to
choose their own Moderatours, and to execute all the
<pb n="016"/><anchor id="Pg016"/>
parts of ecclesiastical jurisdiction according to their own limits
appointed them by the Kirk.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Act. Sess. 14. December 6. 1638.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Condemning the Service-book, Book of Canons,
Book of Ordination, and the high
Commission.</hi></head>

<p>
I. The Assembly having diligently considered the Book of
common prayer, lately obtruded upon the reformed
Kirk within this Realme, both in respect of the manner of
the introducing thereof, and in respect of the matter which
it containeth, findeth that it hath been devised and brought
in by the pretended Prelats, without direction from the
Kirk, and pressed upon ministers without warrand from the
Kirk, to be universally received as the only forme of divine
service under all highest paines, both civill and ecclesiasticall,
and the book it self, beside the <hi rend='italic'>popish</hi> frame and
forms in divine worship, to containe many <hi rend='italic'>popish</hi> errours and
ceremonies, and the seeds of manifold and grosse superstition
and idolatrie. The Assembly therefore all in one voice,
hath rejected, and condemned and by these presents doth reject
and condemne the said book, not only as illegally introduced,
but also as repugnant to the doctrine, discipline
and order of this reformed Kirk, to the Confession of
Faith, constitutions of generall Assemblies, and acts of Parliament
establishing the true Religion; and doth prohibite
the use and practice thereof: and ordaine Presbyteries to
proceed with the censure of the Kirk against all such as shall
transgresse.
</p>

<p>
II. The Assembly also, taking to their consideration the
book of Canons, and the manner how it hath been introduced,
findeth that it hath been devised by the pretended
Prelats, without warrand or direction from the generall
Assembly; and to establish a tyrannicall power in the
persons of the pretended Bishops, over the worship of
God, mens consciences, liberties and goods, and to
overthrow the whole discipline and government of the generall
<pb n="017"/><anchor id="Pg017"/>
and Synodall Assemblies, Presbyteries, and Sessions
formerly established in our Kirk.
</p>

<p>
Therefore the Assembly all in one voice hath rejected and
condemned, and by these presents doth reject and condemne
the said book, as contrare to the confession of our Faith,
and repugnant to the established government, the book of
Discipline, and the acts and constitutions of our Kirk: prohibits
the use and practise of the same; and ordains Presbyteries
to proceed with the censure of the Kirk against all
such as shall transgresse.
</p>

<p>
III. The Assembly having considered the book of consecration
and ordination, findeth it to have been framed by
the Prelats, to have been introduced and practised without
warrand of authority, either civill or ecclesiasticall: and
that it establisheth offices in Gods house, which are not warranded
by the word of God, and are repugnant to the Discipline,
and constitutions of our Kirk, that it is an impediment
to the entrie of fit and worthie men to the ministery, and to
the discharge of their dutie after their entrie, conforme to
the discipline of our Kirk. Therefore the Assembly all
in one voice hath rejected and condemned, and by these
presents doe reject and condemne the said book; and prohibits
the use and practise of the same: And ordaines Presbyteries
to proceed with the censure of the Kirk against all
such as shall transgresse.
</p>

<p>
IV. The generall Assembly, after due tryall, having
found that the Court of high Commission, hath been erected
without the consent or procurement of the Kirk, or consent
of the Estates in Parliament, that it subverteth the jurisdiction
and ordinarie judicatories and Assemblies of the Kirk-Sessions,
Presbyteries, provinciall and nationall Assemblies,
that it is not regulate by lawes civill or ecclesiasticall,
but at the discretion and arbitrement of the Commissioners;
that it giveth to ecclesiasticall persons, the power of both
the swords, and to persons meerly civill, the power of the
keys and Kirk censures: Therefore the Assembly all in one
voice, hath disallowed and condemned, and by these presents
doth disallow and condemne the said court, as unlawfull
in it selfe, and prejudiciall to the liberties of Christ&mdash;Kirk
<pb n="018"/><anchor id="Pg018"/>
and Kingdome, the Kings honour in maintaining the
established lawes and judicatories of the Kirk; and prohibits
the use and practise of the same; and ordaines Presbyteries
to proceed with the censures of the Kirk, against all such
as shall transgresse.
</p>

<p>
After the serious discussing of the several Processes, in many Sessions,
from Sess. 14. (which are in the Clerks hands, and
needeth not here to be insert) the following sentences were solemnly
pronounced after Sermon by the Moderatour, in the Assembly
of <emph>Glasgow</emph>, <hi rend='italic'>Sess. 20 December 13, 1638.</hi>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Sentence of deposition and excommunication
against Mr.</hi> John Spottiswood, <hi rend='italic'>pretended Archbishop
of St.</hi> Andrews; <hi rend='italic'>Mr.</hi> Patrik Lindsay,
<hi rend='italic'>pretended Archbishop of</hi> Glasgow:
<hi rend='italic'>Mr.</hi> David Lindsay, <hi rend='italic'>pretended
Bishop of</hi> Edinburgh: <hi rend='italic'>Mr.</hi> Thomas Sidserfe,
<hi rend='italic'>pretended Bishop of</hi> Galloway: <hi rend='italic'>Mr.</hi>
John Maxwell, <hi rend='italic'>pretended Bishop of</hi> Rosse:
<hi rend='italic'>Mr.</hi> Walter Whyt-foord, <hi rend='italic'>pretended Bishop
of</hi> Brechen.</head>

<p>
The general Assembly, having heard the libels and complaints,
given in against the foresaids pretended Bishops
to the Presbyterie of <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, and sundry other Presbyteries
within their pretended Dyocies, and by the saids
Presbyteries referred to the Assembly, to be tryed: The
saids pretended Bishops being lawfully cited, often-times
called, and their Procutour <hi rend='italic'>Doctour Robert Hammiltoun</hi>, and
not compearing, but declining and protesting against this
Assembly, as is evident by their declinatour, and protestation
given in by the said <hi rend='italic'>Doctour Robert Hammiltoun</hi> minister
at <hi rend='italic'>Glasfoord</hi>, which by the acts of Assembly is censurable
with summar excommunication: Entered in consideration
of the said declinatour, and finding the same not to be relevant,
but on the contrare to be a displayed banner against
<pb n="019"/><anchor id="Pg019"/>
the setled order and government of this Kirk, to be fraughted
with insolent and disdainful speeches, lies and calumnies
against the lawful members of this Assembly, proceeded
to the cognition of the saids complaints, and libels
against them; and finding them guiltie of the breach of the
cautions, agreed upon in the Assembly holden at <hi rend='italic'>Montrose</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Anno</hi> 1600. for restricting of the minister voter in Parliament,
from incroaching upon the liberties and jurisdiction
of this Kirk, which was set down with certification of deposition,
infamie, and excommunication, specially for
receiving of consecration to the office of Episcopacie, condemned
by the confession of Faith, and acts of this Kirk, as
having no warrand, nor foundament in the word of God,
and by vertue of this usurped power, and power of the high
Commission, pressing the Kirk with novations in the worship
of God, and for sundrie other haynous offences, and
enormities, at length expressed, and clearly proven in
their processe, and for their refusal to underly the tryal of
the reigning slander of sundrie other grosse transgressions
and crymes laid to their charge: Therefore the Assembly
moved with zeal to the glorie of God, and purging of his
Kirk, hath ordained the saids pretended Bishops to be deposed,
and by these presents doth depose them, not only
of the office of Commissionaire to vote in Parliament, Councel,
or Convention in name of the Kirk, but also of all
functions whether of pretended Episcopal or ministerial calling,
declareth them infamous. And likewise ordaineth
the saids pretended Bishops to be excommunicate, and declared
to be of these whom Christ commandeth to be holden
by all and every one of the faithful as ethnicks, and publicanes;
and the sentence of excommunication to be pronounced
by <hi rend='italic'>Mr. Alexander Henderson</hi>, Moderatour in face of
the Assembly in the high Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi>; and the execution
of the sentence to bee intimat in all the Kirks of <hi rend='italic'>Scotland</hi> by
the Pastours of every particular congregation, as they will
be answerable to their Presbyteries and Synods, or the next
general Assembly, in case of the negligence of Presbyteries
and Synods.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="020"/><anchor id="Pg020"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Sentence of deposition and excommunication,
against</hi> Mr. Adam Ballantyne, <hi rend='italic'>pretended Bishop of</hi>
Aberdeen, <hi rend='italic'>and Mr. James Wedderburn
pretended Bishop of</hi> Dumblane.</head>

<p>
The generall Assembly, having heard the lybels and complaints
given in against the foresaids pretended Bishops,
of <hi rend='italic'>Aberdeen</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Dumblane</hi>, to the Presbytery of <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>,
and sundry Presbyteries within their pretended Dioceses,
and by the saids Presbyteries referred to this Assembly to be
tryed: The saids pretended Bishops being lawfully cited,
often-times called, and not compearing, proceeded to the
cognition of the complaints and lybels against them, and finding
them guilte of the breach of the cautions, agreed upon
in the Assembly holden at <hi rend='italic'>Montrose</hi>, Anno 1600 for restricting
the minister voter in Parliament, from encroaching upon
the liberties and jurisdictions of this Kirk, which was set
down with certification of deposition, infamie and excommunication,
specially for receiving of consecration to the office
of Episcopacie, condemned by the confession of Faith, and
acts of this Kirk, as having no warrand nor foundament in
the word of God, and by vertue of this usurped power, and
power of the high Commission, pressing the Kirk with novations
in the worship of God, and for sundry other haynous
offences and enormities, and length expressed, and clearly
proven in their Processe, and for their refusall to underly
the tryall of the reigning slander of sundry other grosse transgressions
and offences laid to their charge: Therefore the
assembly moved with zeal to the glorie of God, and purging
of the Kirk, hath ordained the saids pretended Bishops to be
deposed, and by these presents doth depose them, not only
of the office of Commissionary to vote in Parliament, Councell,
or Convention, in name of the Kirk, but also of all
functions, whether of pretended Episcopall or ministeriall
calling, declareth them infamous: and likewise ordains the
saids pretended Bishops to be excommunicate, and declared
to be of these whom Christ commanded to be holden by all
<pb n="021"/><anchor id="Pg021"/>
and every one of the faithfull as Ethnicks and Publicans; and
the sentence of excommunication to be pronounced by Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>Alexander Henderson</hi> Moderatour, in face of the Assembly
after Sermon, in the high Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi>: and that the execution
of the sentence be intimat in all the Kirks within this
Realme, by the Pastours of every particular congregation,
as they will be answerable to their Presbyteries and Synods,
or the next generall Assembly, in case of the negligence of
Presbyteries and Synods.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Sentence of deposition against Master</hi> John
Guthry, <hi rend='italic'>pretended Bishop of</hi> Murray:
<hi rend='italic'>Mr.</hi> John Grahame,
<hi rend='italic'>pretended Bishop of</hi> Orknay, <hi rend='italic'>Mr.</hi> James
Fairlie, <hi rend='italic'>pretended Bishop of</hi> Lismoir:
<hi rend='italic'>Mr.</hi>
Neil Cambell, <hi rend='italic'>pretended Bishop
of</hi> Isles.</head>

<p>
The generall Assembly having heard the lybels and complaints
given in against the foresaids pretended Bishops,
to the Presbyterie of <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, and sundrie Presbyteries
within their Dyocies, and by the saids Presbyteries referred
to this Assembly to bee tryed: the saids pretended Bishops
being lawfully cited, often-times called, and not compearing,
proceeded to the cognition of the complaints and lybels
against them; and finding them guiltie of the breach of
the cautions agreed upon in the Assembly at
<hi rend='italic'>Montrose</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Anno</hi>
1600. for restricting of the minister, voter in Parliament,
from incroaching upon the liberties and Jurisdictions of this
Kirk, which was set down with certification of deposition,
infamie and excommunication; and especially for receiving
consecration to the office or Episcopacie condemned by the
confession of Faith, and acts of this Kirk, as having no
warrand nor foundament in the word of God, and by vertue
of this usurped power, and power of the high commission,
pressing the Kirk with novations in the worship of God;
and for their refusall to underly the tryall of the reigning
slander of sundrie other grosse transgressions and offences,
<pb n="022"/><anchor id="Pg022"/>
laid to their charge: Therefore the Assembly, moved with
zeal to the glorie of God, and purging of this Kirk, ordaines
the saids pretended Bishops, to bee deposed, and by
these presents doth depose them, not only of the office of
commissionarie, to vote in Parliament, Councel, or convention
in name of the Kirk: but also of all functions,
whether of pretended Episcopall, or ministeriall calling:
And likewise in case they acknowledge not this Assembly,
reverence not the constitutions thereof, and obey
not the sentence, and make not their repentance, conforme
to the order prescribed by this Assembly, ordaines
them to be excommunicated, and declared to bee of
these whom Christ commandeth to be holden by all and
every one of the faithfull as Ethnicks and Publicanes: and
the sentence of excommunication to be pronounced upon
their refusall, in the Kirks appointed, by any of those who
are particularly named, to have the charge of trying their
repentance or impenitencie, and that the execution of this
sentence bee intimate in all the Kirks within this Realme by
the Pastours of every particular Congregation, as they will
be answerable to their Presbyteries and Synods, or the next
generall Assembly, in case of negligence of the Presbyteries
and Synods.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Sentence of deposition against Maister</hi> Alexander
Lindsay <hi rend='italic'>pretended Bishop of</hi> Dunkell.</head>

<p>
The generall Assembly having heard the complaint and
lybel given in against Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Alexander Lindesay</hi> pretended
Bishop of <hi rend='italic'>Dunkell</hi>,
to the Presbytery of <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, and sundry
Presbyteries of his pretended Dyocie, and by the Presbyteries
referred to this Assembly to be tryed: The said
pretended Bishop being lawfully cited, often-times called,
&amp; not compearing, but by a letter of excuse submitting himself
to the Assembly, proceeded to the cognition of the
complaint and lybell itselfe against him, and finding him
guiltie of the breach of the cautions agreed upon in the Assembly
<pb n="023"/><anchor id="Pg023"/>
holden at <hi rend='italic'>Montrose</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Anno</hi> 1600 for restricting the
minister voter in parliament, from encroaching upon the
liberties and jurisdictions of this Kirk, which was set down
with certification of deposition, infamie and excommunication,
especially for receiving consecration to the office of
Episcopacie condemned by the confession of Faith, and
acts of this Kirk, as having no warrand nor foundament in
the word of God, and by vertue of this usurped power, and
power of the high Commission, pressing the Kirk with novations
in the worship of God: Therefore the Assembly
moved with zeal to the glory of God, and purging of this
Kirk, hath ordained the said Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Alexander</hi> to bee deposed,
and by these presents deposeth him, from the pretended
Episcopall function, and from the office of commissionarie
to vote in Parliament, Councel or Convention in name of the
Kirk, and doth suspend him from all ministeriall function,
and providing he acknowledge this Assembly, reverence
the constitutions of it, and obey this sentence, and make
his repentance conforme to the order prescribed, continueth
him in the ministrie of St. <hi rend='italic'>Madoze</hi>; And likewise, if he
acknowledge not this Assembly, reverence not the constitutions
of it, and obey not the sentence, and make his repentance,
conforme to the order prescribed by this Assembly,
ordains him to be excommunicat, and declared to bee
one of those whom Christ commandeth to bee holden by all
and every one of the faithfull, as an Ethnick and Publicane,
and the sentence of excommunication to be pronounced
upon his refusall, in the Kirks appointed, by one of these
who are particularly named, to have the charge of trying his
repentance or impenitencie, and that the execution of this
sentence be intimate in all the Kirks within this Realme, by
the Pastours of every particular congregation, as they will
be answerable to their Presbyteries and Synods, or the next
generall Assembly, in case of the negligence of Presbyteries,
and Synods.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="024"/><anchor id="Pg024"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Sentence of deposition against Master</hi> John
Abernethie <hi rend='italic'>pretended Bishop of</hi> Cathnes.</head>

<p>
The generall Assembly having heard the lybell and complaint
given in against Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Abernethie</hi> pretended Bishop
of <hi rend='italic'>Cathnes</hi>
to the Presbytery of <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, and sundry
Presbyteries within his Dyocie: And by the saids Presbyteries,
referred to this Assembly to be tryed: The said
pretended Bishop being lawfully cited, often-times called,
and not compearing, but by his letter of excuse upon his
sicknesse, proceeded to the cognition of the complaint and
lybell it selfe against him, and finding him guiltie of the
breach of the cautions, agreed upon in the Assembly holden
at <hi rend='italic'>Montrose</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Anno</hi> 1600. for restricting the minister voter in
Parliament, from encroaching upon the liberties and jurisdictions
of this Kirk, which was set down with certification
of deposition, infamie, and excommunication, specially
for receiving consecration to the office of Episcopacie,
condemned by the confession of Faith, and acts of this Kirk
as having no warrand nor foundament in the word of God,
and by vertue of the usurped power, and power of the high
Commission pressing the Kirk with novations in the worship
of God: Therefore the assembly moved with zeal to the
glorie of God, and purging of this Kirk, hath ordaineth the
said Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John</hi> to be deposed, and by these presents deposeth
him from the pretended Episcopall function, and from the
office of Commissionary to vote in Parliament, Councel, or
convention, in name of the Kirk, and doth suspend him
from the ministeriall function. And providing he acknowledge
this Assembly, reverence the constitutions of it, and
obey the sentence, and make his repentance conforme
to the order prescribed by this Assembly, will admit him
to the ministerie of a particular flok: and likewise, in case
he acknowledge not this Assembly, reverence not
the constitutions of it, and make his repentance conforme
to the order prescribed by this Assembly, ordains him
to be excommunicate, and declared to be one of these whom
<pb n="025"/><anchor id="Pg025"/>
Christ commandeth to be holden by all and everyone of
the faithfull as an Ethnick and Publicane: and the sentence
of excommunication to be pronounced upon his
refusall in the Kirks appointed, by one of these who
are particularly named to have this charge of trying his repentance
or impenitencie, and that the execution of this sentence
be intimat in all the Kirks within this Realme, by the
Pastours of every particular Congregation, as they will be
answerable to their Presbyteries and Synods, or the next generall
Assembly, in case of the negligence of Presbyteries
and Synods.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Act of the Assembly at <hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi>, Sess. 16.
December 8. 1638.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Declaring Episcopacie to have been abjured by the Confession
of Faith</hi>, 1580. <hi rend='italic'>And to be
removed out of this Kirk.</hi></head>

<p>
The Assembly taking to their most grave and serious consideration,
first the unspeakable goodnesse, and great
mercy of God, manifested to this Nation, in that so necessarie,
so difficult, and so excelent and divine work of reformation,
which was at last brought to such perfection,
that this Kirk was reformed, not only in doctrine and worship,
but also after many conferences and publick reasonings
in divers nationall Assemblies, joyned with solemne humiliations
and prayers to God, the discipline and government
of the Kirk, as the hedge and guard of the doctrine and worship,
was prescribed according to the rule of Gods word,
in the book of Policie and Discipline, agreed upon in the
Assembly 1578. and insert in the register 1581. established
by the Acts of Assemblies, by the confession of Faith, sworn
and subscribed, at the direction of the Assembly, and by
continuall practise of this Kirk: Secondly, that by mens
seeking their own things: and not the things of Jesus Christ;
divers novations have been introduced to the great disturbance
<pb n="026"/><anchor id="Pg026"/>
of this Kirk, so firmly once compacted, and to the
endangering of Religion, and many grosse evils obtruded,
to the utter undoing of the work of reformation, and change
of the whole forme of worship and face of this Kirk; Thirdly,
that all his Majesties Subjects both Ecclesiasticall and civil,
being without consent of the Kirk, commanded to receive
with reverence a new book of common prayer, as the
only forme to be used in Gods publick worship, and the contraveeners
to be condignely censured, and punished, and
after many supplications and complaints, knowing no other
way for the preservation of Religion; were moved by God,
and drawn by necessitie, to renew the nationall <hi rend='italic'>Covenant</hi>
of this Kirk, and Kingdome, which the Lord since hath
blessed from heaven, and to subscribe the <hi rend='italic'>Confession of Faith</hi>,
with an application thereof, abjuring the great evils wherewith
they were now pressed, and suspending the practise of
all novations formerly introduced, till they should bee tryed
in a free generall Assembly, Lastly, that some of his Majesties
Subjects of sundrie ranks, have by his Majesties commandement
subscribed and renewed the confession of Faith,
without the former application, and that both the one and
the other subscribers have subscribed the said Confession of
Faith in this year, as it was professed and according to the
meaning that it had in this Kingdome, when it was first subscribed
1581. and afterward the Assembly therefore, both
by the subscription of his Majesties high <hi rend='italic'>Commissioner</hi>, and of
the Lords of secret Councel, Septem. 22. 1638. And by
the acts of Councel, of the date foresaid, bearing that they
subscribed the said Confession, and ordaining all his Majesties
Liedges to subscribe the same, according to the foresaid
date and tennour, and as it was then professed within
this Kingdome, as likewise by the Protestation of some of
the Senatours of the Colledge of justice, when they were required
to subscribe, and by the many doubtings of his Majesties
good Subjects, especially because the subscribers of
the Confession in <hi rend='italic'>February</hi> 1635. are bound to suspend the
approbation of the corruptions of the government of the
Kirk, till they be tryed in a free generall Assembly; finding
it proper for them, and most necessary and incumbent
<pb n="027"/><anchor id="Pg027"/>
to them, to give out the true meaning thereof as it was at
first professed. That all his Majesties Subjects in a matter so
important; as is the publik Confession of Faith, so solemnely
sworn and subscribed, may be of one minde, and one heart,
and have full satisfaction to all their doubts, and that the
posteritie afterward may be fully perswaded of the true meaning
thereof, after earnest calling upon the name of God,
so religiously attested in the said Confession; have entered
into a diligent search of the registers of the Kirk, and books
of the generall Assembly, which the greatest part of the Assembly
had not seen before; and which by the speciall providence
of God were preserved, brought to their hands, and
publicly acknowledged to bee authentick, and have found
that in the latter confession of the Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Scotland</hi>: We profess,
<hi rend='italic'>that we deteste all traditions brought into the Kirk without, or
against the word of God, and doctrine of this reformed Kirk</hi>: Next,
<hi rend='italic'>we abhorre and deteste all contrarie religion and doctrine</hi>, but
chiefly, <hi rend='italic'>All kinds of papistry in generall &amp; particular heads, as
they were then damned &amp; confuted by the word of God, and Kirk of</hi> Scotland,
<hi rend='italic'>when the said Confession was sworn and subscribed</hi>, An. 1580.
<hi rend='italic'>and</hi> 1581, 1590, <hi rend='italic'>and</hi> 1591. Thirdly,
<hi rend='italic'>that we deteste the Romane Antichrist,
his worldly monarchie, and wicked hierarchie</hi>: Fourthly, <hi rend='italic'>that we
joyn our selves to this reformed Kirk in doctrine, Faith, Religion, &amp; discipline,
promising and swearing by the great name of</hi> GOD, <hi rend='italic'>that we shall
continue in the Doctrine and Discipline of this Kirk, and defend the
same according to our vocation and power all the dayes of our life</hi>.
</p>

<p>
But so it is that Episcopall government is abhorred and detested,
and the government by Ministers and Elders, in
Assemblies generall and provinciall, and Presbyteries was
sworn to, and subscribed in subscribing that Confession,
and ought to be holden by us, if we adhere to the meaning
of the Kirk, when that Confession was framed,
sworn to, and subscribed; unto which we are obliged by
the nationall oath and subscription of this Kirk, as is evident
by the acts of generall Assemblies, agreed upon both before,
at, and after the swearing and subscribing of the said
Confession, in the years above-mentioned, and the book
of policie agreed upon in the Assembly which was holden at
<hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi> the twentie foure of
<hi rend='italic'>April</hi>, and twentie foure of
<pb n="028"/><anchor id="Pg028"/>
<hi rend='italic'>October</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Anno</hi>
1578. Insert in the register of the Kirk, by
ordinance of the Assembly holden at <hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi> 1581 and to
be subscribed by all Ministers, that then did bear, or thereafter
were to bear office in this Kirk, by ordinance of the
Assembly holden the fourth of <hi rend='italic'>August</hi>
at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi> 1590.
And at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi> the second
of <hi rend='italic'>July</hi> 1591. but specially in the
2. 3. 4. 6. 7. and 11, chapters of the said book.
</p>

<p>
The Bishops being tollerat from the year 1572, till the
Assembly holden in <hi rend='italic'>August</hi> 1575. And all this time the Assembly
being wearied with complaints made against them,
did enter in search of the office it selfe, and did agree in this
that the name of a Bishop is common to every one of them
that hath a particular flock, over which he hath a particular
charge, as well to preach the word, as to minister the Sacraments.
</p>

<p>
At the next Assembly which was holden in <hi rend='italic'>April</hi> 1576.
Such Bishops were censured as had not taken them to a particular
flock. In the generall Assembly conveened in <hi rend='italic'>April</hi>
the year of God 1578. Sess. 4. Intimation was made as followeth.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>For so much as the heads of the policie being concluded and agreed
upon in the last Assembly, by the most part of the brethren: certain
of the brethren had some difficultie in the head</hi> de diaconatu,
<hi rend='italic'>whereupon farther reasoning was reserved to this Assembly: It is
therefore required, if any of the brethren have any reasonable doubt or
argument to propone, that he be ready the morow, and then shall be
heard and resolved</hi>. In the 6. Sess. <hi rend='italic'>April</hi> 26. According to
the ordinance made the day before; all persons that had any
doubt or argument to propone, were required to propone
the same; but none offered to propone any argument on the
contrare.
</p>

<p>
In the Assembly holden at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>,
in <hi rend='italic'>October</hi> 1578. It
was showen by the Moderatour thereof to the noble-men,
who were present, viz. <hi rend='italic'>My Lord Chancelour</hi>, the Earle of
<hi rend='italic'>Montrose</hi>, my Lord <hi rend='italic'>Seaton</hi>,
and my Lord <hi rend='italic'>Lindsay</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>What care
and study the Assembly had taken to entertain and keep the puritie of
the sincere word of God, unmixed with the inventions of their own heads,
and to preserve it to the posteritie hereafter, and seeing that
the true Religion is not able to continue nor endure long without a good
<pb n="029"/><anchor id="Pg029"/>
Discipline and policie, in that part also have they imployed their wit
and studie, and drawen forth out of the pure fountain of Gods word,
to bee a Discipline as is meet to remain in the Kirk</hi>.
</p>

<p>
In the same Assembly, the speciall corruptions were set
down, which they craved such of the Bishops as would
submit themselves to the Assembly to remove, with promise,
that if the generall Assembly, hereafter shall
finde further corruptions in the said estate, then hitherto
are expressed that they be content to be reformed by the
said Assembly according to the word of God, when they
shall be required thereto. First, <hi rend='italic'>That they be content to bee
Pastours and Ministers of one flock: That they usurpe no criminall
jurisdiction, that they vote not in Parliament in name of the Kirk,
without Commission from the Kirk: That they take not up for the
maintenance of their ambition and rictousnesse, the emoluments of the
Kirk, which may sustain many Pastours, the Schools, and the
poore; but be content with reasonable livings according to their office:
That they claime not to themselves the titles of Lords temporall, neither
usurpe temporall jurisdictions, whereby they are abstracted from their
office: That they empyre not above the particular Elderships, but
be subject to the same: That they usurpe not the power of the Presbyteries.</hi>
</p>

<p>
The question being proponed by the Synod at <hi rend='italic'>Loutbian</hi> in
the Assembly holden in <hi rend='italic'>July</hi> 1579. anent a generall order
to be taken for erecting of Presbyteries in places where publick
exercise is used, untill the time the policie of the Kirk
be established by a law: It is answered, <hi rend='italic'>The exercise may be judged
to be a Presbyterie.</hi> In the Assembly holden at <hi rend='italic'>Dundie</hi> in
<hi rend='italic'>July</hi> 1580. Sess. 4, The office of a Bishop was abolished by a
particular act; as appeareth by the tennour of the act following.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>For so much as the office of a Bishop, as it is now used and commonly
taken withen this Realme, hath no sure warrand authoritie,
nor good ground in the Scriptures, but is brought in by the
foly and corruption of mans inventions, to the great overthrow of
the Kirk of God, the whole Assembly of the Kirk in one voice after
libertie given to all men to reason in the matter, none opponing
himself in defending the said pretended office, findeth and declareth
the said pretended office, used and termed, as is above said,
unlawfull in the selfe, as having neither foundament, ground,
nor warrand in the word of God, and ordaineth that all such persons,
<pb n="030"/><anchor id="Pg030"/>
as brook or shall brook hereafter the said office, shall be
charged simply to dimit, quite, and leave off the same, as an
office whereunto they are not called of God: and suchlike, to desist
and cease from all preaching, ministration of the Sacraments,
or using any way the office of pastours, while they receive</hi> de novo,
<hi rend='italic'>admission from the generall Assembly, under the pain of excommunication
to be used against them, wherein if they be found disobedient,
or contradict this act in any point, the sentence of excommunication,
after due admonition, to be execute against
them.</hi>
</quote>

<p>
In the same Assembly holden <hi rend='italic'>Anno</hi>
1580. Sess. 10. This
article was appointed to be proponed to the King and Councel,
that the book of policie might be established by an act of
privie Councel, <hi rend='italic'>while a Parliament be holden, at which it might
be confirmed by a law</hi>.
</p>

<p>
The extent of the act made at <hi rend='italic'>Dundie</hi>, was interpreted and
explained in the Assembly, holden at <hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi>,
in <hi rend='italic'>April</hi>, 1581.
Sess. 6. as followeth.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Anent the Act made in the Assembly
holden at</hi> Dundie <hi rend='italic'>against
Bishops, because some difficultie appeareth to some brethren
to arise out of the word</hi> (office) <hi rend='italic'>contained in the said act,
what should be meaned thereby, The Assembly consisting for the
most part of such as voted, and were present in the Assembly at</hi>
Dundie, <hi rend='italic'>to take away the said difficultie, resolving upon the
true meaning and understanding of the said act, declare that they
meaned wholly to condemne the whole estate of Bishops, as they
are now in</hi> Scotland, <hi rend='italic'>and that the same was the determination
and conclusion of the Assembly at this time, because some brethren
doubted, whether the former act was to be understood of the</hi> spiritual
function <hi rend='italic'>only, and others alledged, that the</hi> whole office
of a Bishop <hi rend='italic'>as it was used, was damnable, and that by the
said act, the Bishops should be charged to dimit the same: This
Assembly declareth that they meaned wholly to condemne the whole
estate of Bishops, as they were then in</hi> Scotland, <hi rend='italic'>and that this
was the meaning of the Assembly, at that time</hi>.
</quote>

<p>
The Kings <hi rend='italic'>Commissioner</hi> presented to this Assembly the
Confession of Faith, subscribed by the King, and his houshold,
not long before, together with a plot of the Presbyteries
to be erected, which is registrate in the books of the
<pb n="031"/><anchor id="Pg031"/>
Assembly, with a letter to be directed from his Majestie to
the noble-men and gentle-men of the Countrey, for the
erection of Presbyteries, consisting of Pastours, and Elders,
and dissolution of Prelacies, and with an offer to set forward
the Policie untill it were established by Parliament.
The Kings letter subscribed by his hand, to the Noble-men,
and Gentle-men, was read in open audience of the whole
Assembly.
</p>

<p>
This Assembly ordained the book of Policie to be insert
in the register by the act following.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>For as much as travels have been taken in the framing of the Policie
of the Kirk, and diverse suits have been made to the Magistrat
for approbation thereof, which yet have not taken the happie
effect, which good men would wish, yet that the posteritie
may judge well of the present age; and of the meaning of the Kirk;
The Assembly hath concluded, that the book of Policie agreed to
in diverse Assemblies before, should be registrat in the acts of the
Kirk, and remaine therein</hi> ad perpetuam rei memoriam:
<hi rend='italic'>and the coppies thereof to be taken to every Presbyterie: of which
book the tennour followeth, &amp;c.</hi>
</quote>

<p>
Immediatly after the inserting of the book of Policie, called
there the book of Discipline, the Assembly ordained
that the confession of Faith be subscribed as followeth.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Anent the confession of Faith lately set forth by the Kings Majestie,
and subscribed by his highnesse. The Assembly in one
voice, acknowledgeth the said Confession to be a true, Christian,
and faithful confession, to be eagreed unto by such as truly professe
Christ, and have a care of Religion, and the tennour thereof
to be followed out efoldly as the samine is laid out in the said Proclamation</hi>,
wherein that Discipline is sworn to.
</quote>

<p>
In the general Assembly holden at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>
in <hi rend='italic'>October</hi>
1581. Sess. 10. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Robert Montgomery</hi> is accused for teaching
that Discipline is a thing indifferent. Sess. 23. The
Assembly gave commission to the Presbyterie of <hi rend='italic'>Stirling</hi>, to
charge Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Robert Montgomerie</hi>, to continue in the ministerie
of <hi rend='italic'>Stirling</hi>, and not to medle with any other office or function
of the Kirk, namely in aspyring to the Bishoprick of <hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi>,
against the word of God, and acts of the Kirk, under
the pain of excommunication.
</p>

<pb n="032"/><anchor id="Pg032"/>

<p>
In the same Assembly it is acknowledged that the estate of
Bishops is condemned by the Kirk, a commission for erection
of moe Presbyteries was renewed: and a new ordinance
made for subscribing the confession of Faith, and to proceed
against whatsoever persons that would not acknowledge and
subscribe the same.
</p>

<p>
In the Assembly holden in <hi rend='italic'>April</hi> 1582. there was a new
commission for erection of Presbyteries, where none was as
yet erected, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Robert Montgomerie</hi>, pretending to be Bishop
of <hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi>, was ordained to be deposed and excommunicat,
except hee gave evident tokens of repentance, and
promise to superseed, which he did not: and therefore he
was excommunicat shortly after, according to the ordinance
of this Assembly.
</p>

<p>
In the generall Assembly holden at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, 1582. The
generall Assembly gave commission to some Presbyteries, to
try and censure such as were called Bishops, for the great
slander arising by their impunitie. Commission was given
at this Assembly to present some articles to the Councel and
Estates, for approving and establishing by their authoritie
the Presbyteries, the Synodall, and generall Assemblies.
In the 19. Sess. The Assembly declared, that no Bishop
may sit upon the Councell in name of the Kirk.
</p>

<p>
In the Assembly holden <hi rend='italic'>Anno</hi> 1586. These two articles
were agreed upon. First <hi rend='italic'>It is found that all such as the Scripture
appointeth governours of the Kirk, to wit Pastours, Doctours, and
Elders, may conveen to the generall Assemblies, and vote in Ecclesiasticall
matters.</hi> Secondly: <hi rend='italic'>There are foure office bearers set down
to us by the Scriptures, to wit Pastours, Doctours, Elders, and
Deacons, and the name of Bishop ought not to be taken as it hath been
in time of Papistrie, but is common to all Pastours, and Ministers.</hi>
</p>

<p>
In the Assembly holden <hi rend='italic'>Anno</hi> 1587. Sess. 8. It was ordained
that the admission of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Robert Montgomerie</hi> by the
Presbyterie of <hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi>, suppose to the temporalitie of the
Bishoprick only, be undone and annulled with all possible
diligence, to the effect slander might be removed from the
Kirk. In Sess. 15. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Robert Pont</hi> shewed the Kings presentation
to the Bishoprick of <hi rend='italic'>Cathnes</hi>, &amp; desidered the judgement
of the Assembly. The Assembly in their letter to the
<pb n="033"/><anchor id="Pg033"/>
Kings Majestie, declared that they judged the said <hi rend='italic'>Mr. Robert</hi>
to be a Bishop already according to the Doctrine of St. <hi rend='italic'>Paul</hi>:
But as to that corrupt estate or office, of these who have
been termed Bishops heretofore, they found it not agreable
to the word of God, and that it hath been damned in diverse
Assemblies before.
</p>

<p>
In the instructions given to such as were appointed to wait
upon the Parliament, it was ordained in the same Assembly
Sess. 17. That they be careful that nothing be admitted prejudicial
to the liberties of this Kirk, as it was concluded
according to the word of God in the general Assemblies,
preceeding the year 1584. but precisely to seek the same
to be ratified in the Assembly holden in <hi rend='italic'>March</hi> 1589.
where the articles were made for subscribing the confession
of Faith with the generall band, it was ordained as
followeth.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>For so much as the neighbour Kirk in</hi>
England, <hi rend='italic'>is understood
to bee heavily troubled, for maintaining of the true Discipline and
government: whose grieves ought to move us. Therefore the
Presbytery of</hi> Edinburgh <hi rend='italic'>was ordained to comfort the said Kirk in
the said matter.</hi>
</quote>

<p>
In the Assembly holden 1590. when the confession of
Faith was subscribed universally <hi rend='italic'>de novo</hi>, a ratification of the
liberties of the Kirk, in her jurisdiction, discipline, Presbyteries,
Synods, and generall Assemblies, and an abrogation
of all things contrarie thereunto; was ordained to
be sought both of the Councel and Parliament. In the next
Session it was ordained that the book of Discipline, specially
the controverted heads, should be subscribed by all Ministers
that bear, or hereafter was to bear office in this Kirk,
and that they be charged by the Presbyteries, under the
pain of excommunication: Seeing the word of God cannot
bee keeped in sincerity, unlesse the holy Discipline
be preserved. The Presbyteries were ordained to get a coppie
under the Clerks hand; there were sundrie coppies subscribed
by the Ministers in the Presbyteries yet extant,
as <hi rend='italic'>Hadingtoun</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Dumfermling</hi>,
&amp;c. produced before the
Assembly.
</p>

<pb n="034"/><anchor id="Pg034"/>

<p>
In the Assembly 1591. Sess. 4. The former act anent the
subscription to the book of <hi rend='italic'>Policie</hi> is renewed, and a penaltie
imposed upon the Moderatour, in case it be not put in
execution.
</p>

<p>
In the Assembly <hi rend='italic'>22. May 1592.</hi> Sess. 2. These articles
were drawn up. <hi rend='italic'>That the acts of Parliament made 1584. against
the Discipline, libertie and authoritie of the Kirk be annulled, and
the samine discipline, whereof the Kirk hath been in practise, precisely
ratified. That Abbots, Priors, and other Prelats pretending
the title of the Kirk, be not suffered in time coming.</hi> In the 11.
Session the number of the Presbyteries were given up, and
insert in the Parliament immediatly following. The fifth
of <hi rend='italic'>June</hi> 1592. The libertie, discipline, and jurisdiction of
the true Kirk, in her Sessions, Presbyteries, Synodal and
general Assemblies, is largely ratified, as the samine was
used, and exercised within this Realme, and all the acts
contrary thereto abrogat: The Kings prerogative declared
not to be prejudicial to the same priviledges grounded upon
the word of God, the former commissions to Bishops 1584.
rescinded, and all Ecclesiastical matters, subjected to Presbyteries,
according to the discipline of this Kirk. <hi rend='italic'>Anno</hi> 1595.
The book of Policie with other acts is ratified and ordained
to be printed.
</p>

<p>
It was also cleared that Episcopacie was condemned in
these words of the Confession, HIS WICKED HEIRARCHIE.
For the Popish <hi rend='italic'>Hierarchie</hi> doth consist of Bishops,
Presbyters, and Deacons, that is baptizing and preaching
Deacons: For so it is determined in the councel of <hi rend='italic'>Trent</hi>, in
the 4. chap. <hi rend='italic'>De Sacramento ordinis, can. 6</hi>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Censura propositionum
quarundam ex
Hibernia delatarum
per sacram Facultatem
Theologiæ Parisiensis
facta.</note>
<hi rend='italic'>Si quis dixerît in ecclesia Catholica non esse
heirarchiam divina ordinatione institutam, quæ
constat ex Episcopis. Presbyteris &amp; ministris,
anathema sit.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Bellarmine</hi> likewise in his
book <hi rend='italic'>De Clericis.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>cap.</hi>
11. saith, <hi rend='italic'>That there
are three Hierarchies in the militant Kirk: The first of Bishops,
the second of Priests, the third of Deacons, and that the Deacons are
also Princes, if they be compared with the people:</hi> This proposition
following; <hi rend='italic'>Hierarchia ecclesiastica constat ex Pontifice,
Cardinalibus, Archiepiscopis, Episcopis &amp; Regularibus</hi>, was
<pb n="035"/><anchor id="Pg035"/>
censured by the Facultie of Theologie in the Universitie at
<hi rend='italic'>Paris</hi>, as followeth, <hi rend='italic'>Inicta
prima propositione enumeratio membrorum
hierarchiæ ecclesiasticæ sen sacri principatus, divina ordinatione
instituti est manca &amp; redundaus atque, inducens in errorem
contrarium determinationi sacræ Sinodi Tridentinæ</hi>: The proposition
was defective, because it pretermitted the Presbyters
and Deacons; it was censured as redundant, because it
made the <hi rend='italic'>Hierarchie</hi> to consist of the
<hi rend='italic'>Pope</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Cardinals</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Archbishops</hi>,
and <hi rend='italic'>Regulars</hi>; the <hi rend='italic'>Pope</hi>
is not within the <hi rend='italic'>Hierarchie of Primats</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Metropolitanes</hi>, and
<hi rend='italic'>Archbishops</hi>, but as they are Bishops.
Furthermore, this <hi rend='italic'>Hierarchie</hi> is distinguished in the confession
from the <hi rend='italic'>Popes monarchie</hi>.
And howbeit this <hi rend='italic'>Hierarchie</hi>
be called the <hi rend='italic'>Antichrists Hierarchie</hi>, yet it is not to distinguish
betwixt the <hi rend='italic'>Hierarchie</hi> in the Popish Kirk, and any other as
lawful: But the <hi rend='italic'>Hierarchie</hi>, wheresoever it is, is called
his, as the rest of the Popish corruptions are called his: To
wit, <hi rend='italic'>Invocation of Saints</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>canonisation of Saints</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>dedication of
Altars</hi>, &amp;c.
are called his, not that there is another lawfull
canonization, invocation, or dedication of altars: whatsoever
corruption was in the Kirk, either in doctrine, worship,
or government since the ministry of iniquitie began
to work, and is retained, and maintained, by the <hi rend='italic'>Pope</hi>,
and obtruded upon the Kirk by his authority, are his. A
passage also out of the history of the councell of <hi rend='italic'>Trent</hi>
was alledged, where it is related, that the Councell
would not define the <hi rend='italic'>Hierarchie</hi>
by the <hi rend='italic'>seven orders</hi>: we have
in our confession of Faith the <hi rend='italic'>manifold
orders</hi> set apart and distinguished
from the <hi rend='italic'>Hierarchie</hi>, but as it is set down in the
cannon above cited: We have in the book of Policie or second
booke of Discipline, in the end of the second chapter,
this conclusion agreed upon. <hi rend='italic'>Therefore all the ambitious titles
invented in the kingdome of Antichrist, and in his usurped HIERARCHIE
which are not of one of these four sorts, To wit,
Pastours, Doctours, Elders, and Deacons, together with offices
depending thereupon, in one word ought to be rejected.</hi>
</p>

<p>
All which and many other warrands being publickly read,
and particularly at great length examined, and all objections
answered in face of the Assembly, all the members of the
Assembly being many times desired and required to propone
<pb n="036"/><anchor id="Pg036"/>
their doubts, and scruples, and every one being heard to
the full, and after much agitation as fully satisfied; the
Moderatour at last exhorting every one to declare his minde,
did put the matter to voicing in these termes: <hi rend='italic'>Whether according
to the confession of faith, as it was professed in the year</hi> 1580.
1581. and 1590. <hi rend='italic'>There be any other Bishop, but a Pastour of a
particular flock, having no preheminence nor power over his brethren,
and whether by that Confession, as it was then professed, all other episcopacie
is abjured, and ought to bee removed out of this Kirk.</hi> The
whole Assembly most unanimously, without contradiction
of any one (and with the hesitation of one allanerly) professing
full perswasion of minde, did voice, <hi rend='italic'>that all Episcopacie
different from that of a Pastour over, a particular flock, was abjured
in this Kirk, and to be removed out of it</hi>. And therefore Prohibites
underr ecclesiasticall censure any to usurpe accept, defend,
or obey the pretended authoritie thereof in time coming.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Act. Sess. 17. December 10. 1638.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>The Assembly at</hi> Glasgow,
<hi rend='italic'>declaring the five Articles of</hi>
Perth <hi rend='italic'>to have been abjured and
to bee removed.</hi></head>

<p>
The Assembly remembring the uniformity of worship
which was in this Kirk, before the articles of <hi rend='italic'>Perth</hi>, the
great rent which entered at that time, and hath continued
since, with the lamentable effects, that it hath produced
both against Pastours, and professours, the unlawfulnesse
and nullitie of <hi rend='italic'>Perth</hi> Assembly already declared by this Assembly,
and that in the necessarie renewing of the confession
of Faith in <hi rend='italic'>February</hi> 1638. the practice of novations introduced
in the worship of God, was suspended, till they should
be determined in a free generall Assembly: and that in the
same year at his Majesties command some had subscribed the
confession of Faith, as it was professed when it was first subscribed:
For these causes the Assembly entered into a diligent
tryall of the foresaid articles, whether they be constant
to the confession of Faith, as it was meaned and professed in
<pb n="037"/><anchor id="Pg037"/>
the year 1580. 1581. 1590. and 1591. And findeth that first
in generall: In the confession of Faith we professe, <hi rend='italic'>We willingly
agree in our consciences to the forme of Religion, of a long time
openly professed by the Kings Majestie, and Whole body of this
Realme in all points, as unto Gods undoubted truth and verity,
grounded only upon his written word, and therefore abhor and deteste
all contrary Religion and Doctrine, but chiefly, all kinde of papistrie
in generall and partrcular heads, even as they were then
damned and confuted by the Word of God and Kirk of</hi> Scotland, <hi rend='italic'>and
in speciall the Romane Antichrist his five bastard sacraments,
with all rites, ceremonies and false doctrine, added to the ministration
of the true Sacraments, without the word of God, his cruell
judgement against Infants departing without the Sacrament, his absolute
necessitie of baptisme, and finally, we deteste all his vain allegories,
rites, signes, and traditions brought into the Kirk without,
or against the word of God, and doctrine of this true reformed Kirk,
to the which we joyne our selves willingly in Doctrine, Faith, Religion,
Discipline, and use of the holy Sacraments, as lively members
of the same in Christ our Head; promising and swearing, &amp;c.</hi>
And that these five articles are contrarie to the Religion then
professed, were confuted by the word of God, and Kirk
of <hi rend='italic'>Scotland</hi>, or are rites,
and ceremonies, added to the ministration,
of the true Sacraments, without the word God,
or nourish the popish judgement against Infants departing
without the Sacrament, or absolute necessitie, of Baptisme
or rites, signes, and traditions brought in to the Kirk, with
out or against the word of God, and doctrine of this true reformed
Kirk.
</p>

<p>
And next in particular, concerning festivall dayes, findeth,
that in the explication of the first head, of the first
book of Discipline, it was thought good that the feasts of
<hi rend='italic'>Christmas</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Circumcision</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Epiphanie</hi>, with the feasts of the Apostles,
Martyres, and Virgine <hi rend='italic'>Mary</hi>, bee utterly abolished,
because they are neither commanded nor warranded by
Scripture, and that such as observe them be punished by civill
Magistrats. Here utter abolition is craved, and not reformation
of abuses only, and that because the observation
of such feasts hath no warrand from the word of God. In
the generall Assembly holden at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Anno</hi> 1556. the
<pb n="038"/><anchor id="Pg038"/>
large confession of <hi rend='italic'>Helvetia</hi> was approved, but with speciall
exception against the same five dayes, which are now urged
upon us. It was not then the Popish observation only,
with the Popish opinion of worship and merit, which was
disallowed; (for so the reformed Kirk in <hi rend='italic'>Helvetia</hi> did not
observe them) but <hi rend='italic'>simpliciter</hi> all observation. For this end
was read a letter in Latine, sent at that time by some of our
divines to certaine divines in these parts to this purpose. In
the Assembly holden 1575. in <hi rend='italic'>August</hi>, complaint was made
against the Ministers and Readers beside <hi rend='italic'>Aberdene</hi>; because
they assembled the people to preaching and prayers upon
certane festival dayes: So that preaching and prayers upon
festival dayes was judged rebukable. It was ordained likewise,
that complaint be made to the Regent, upon the
town of <hi rend='italic'>Drumfreis</hi>, for urging and convoying a Reader to
the Kirk with Tabret and Whistle, to read Prayers, all
the holy dayes of <hi rend='italic'>Christmas</hi>, upon the refusal of their own
Reader. Among the articles directed by this Assembly to
the Regent: It was craved that all holy dayes hereto-fore
keeped holy, beside the Lords day, such a <hi rend='italic'>Yooleday</hi>, and
Saints dayes, and such others may bee abolished, and a
certain penaltie appointed for banqueting, playing, feasting
upon these dayes. In the Assembly holden in <hi rend='italic'>April</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Anno</hi> 1577. It was ordained that the visitors with the advice
of the Synodal Assembly, should admonish Ministers,
preaching or ministrating the Communion at <hi rend='italic'>Easter</hi>, or
<hi rend='italic'>Christmas</hi>, or other like superstitious times, or Readers
reading, to desist, under the paine of deprivation. In the
ninth head of the first book of Discipline, the reason is set
down against <hi rend='italic'>Easter</hi> Communion. <hi rend='italic'>Your honours are
not ignorant how superstitiously the people run to that action at Pascheven;
as if the time gave vertue to the Sacrament, and how the rest of the
whole year, they are carelesse and negligent, as if it appartained
not to them, but at that time only. And for this reason, other times
were appointed by that book, for that holy action.</hi> In the Assembly
holden 1596. begun in <hi rend='italic'>March</hi> 1595. at which time the
<hi rend='italic'>Covenant</hi> was renewed, superstition and idolatrie breaking
forth in observing festival dayes; setting out of bone-fires,
singing Carols, are reakoned amongst the corruptions which
<pb n="039"/><anchor id="Pg039"/>
were to be amended: And the Pulpits did sound from time
to time, against all shew of observing any festival day whatsoever,
except the Lords day.
</p>

<p>
Concerning kneeling at the Communion, findeth that in
the confession of Faith prefixed before the Psalmes, and approved
by our Kirk in the very beginning of the reformation,
we have these words, <hi rend='italic'>Neither in the ministration of the Sacraments,
must we follow men: but as Christ himself hath ordained,
so must they be ministred.</hi> In the large confession of Faith
chap. 23. It is required as necessary, for the right ministration
of the Sacraments, that they bee ministred in such elements,
and in such sort, as God hath appointed, and that
men have adulterate the Sacraments with their own inventions:
So that no part of Christs action abideth in the originall
puritie. The judgement of our reformers, who drew up
the large Confession, was by cleare evidents shewed to be
contrary to this gesture in the act of receiving the Sacrament.
In the order of celebrating the Lords Supper, prefixed before
the Psalmes in meeter, <hi rend='italic'>sitting
and distributing by the Communicants</hi>,
are joined: as likewise by the second head of the
first book of Discipline, as nearest to Christs own action, and
to his perfect practise, and most convenient to that holy action,
and all inventions devised by man are condemned, as alterations
and accusations of Christs perfect ordinance: Ministers
were enjoyned by act of Assembly in <hi rend='italic'>December 1562.</hi>
To observe the order of <hi rend='italic'>Geneva</hi>: that is the English Kirk at
<hi rend='italic'>Geneva</hi>: where Master <hi rend='italic'>Knox</hi> had been
sometime Minister, in the ministration of the Sacraments. This act was renewed
in the Assembly holden in <hi rend='italic'>December 1564.</hi> where Ministers
are referred to the order set down before the Psalmes,
for ministration of the Sacraments; which is all one with
the former: for that was the order of the English Kirk
at <hi rend='italic'>Geneva</hi>.
</p>

<p>
In the Parliament holden <hi rend='italic'>Anno</hi> 1567. It was declared that
whosoever did not participate of the Sacraments, as they
were then publickly administrat in this reformed Kirk ought
not to be reputed members of this Kirk. The act for the
Kings oath at his coronation, to maintain the due administration
of the Sacraments, as they were then ministred,
<pb n="040"/><anchor id="Pg040"/>
<hi rend='italic'>Anno</hi> 1567. Was ratified
<hi rend='italic'>Anno</hi> 1581. At which time the short
Confession, adhering to the use of the Sacraments, in the Kirk
of <hi rend='italic'>Scotland</hi>, was subscribed:
as also <hi rend='italic'>Anno</hi> 1592. after the second
Subscription to the confession of Faith. In the Parliament
1572. an act was made against such as did not participat
of the Sacraments as they were then rightly ministered:
But the gesture of kneeling, in the act of receiving, putteth
the ministration of the Sacraments used in this Kirk out of
frame: whereby it is clear that whatsoever gesture or rite,
cannot stand with the administration of the Sacraments as
they were then ministred and were ministred ever since the
reformation, till the year 1618. must bee condemned by our
Kirk as a rite added to the true ministration of the Sacraments
without the word of God, and as rite or tradition brought
in without, or against the word of God, or doctrine of this
reformed Kirk.
</p>

<p>
III. Concerning <hi rend='italic'>Confirmation</hi>; The Assembly findeth it to
be comprehended in the clause of the Confession, where
the <hi rend='italic'>five bastard Sacraments</hi>
are condemned. And seeing <hi rend='italic'>Episcopacie</hi>
is condemned, <hi rend='italic'>imposition of hands</hi> by Bishops falleth to
the ground. And in all the acts for catechising or examination
before admission to the communion, no inkling of <hi rend='italic'>imposition
of hands</hi>.
</p>

<p>
IIII. Concerning the administration of the Sacraments
<hi rend='italic'>in private places</hi>, or private baptisme, and communion;
findeth that in the book of common order, set down before
the Psalmes, it is said, <hi rend='italic'>That the Sacraments art not ordained of
God to be used in private corners, as charmers and sorcerers use to doe,
but left to the Congregation.</hi> In the Assembly
holden at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>
in <hi rend='italic'>October Anno 1581.</hi> the same year and Assembly, that
the confession of Faith was subscribed: It was ordained,
<hi rend='italic'>that the Sacraments be not administred in private houses, but solemnly
according to good order hither to observed</hi>. The Minister of
<hi rend='italic'>Tranent</hi> was suspended at that time, for baptizing an infant in a
private house: but confessing his offence, he was ordained
to make his publick repentance in the Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Tranent</hi>, before
he be released. Another Minister was to be tried, and
censured, for baptizing privately, and celebrating the
Communion upon <hi rend='italic'>Pasch-day</hi>, at the
Assembly holden in <hi rend='italic'>October
<pb n="041"/><anchor id="Pg041"/>
1580.</hi> Which acts and censures make manifest, that our
Kirk abhorred whatsoever fostered the opinion of the necessitie
of Baptisme, and giving of the Sacrament, as a <hi rend='italic'>viaticum</hi>.
</p>

<p>
All which, and many other acts, grounds, and reasons,
being at length agitated, and with mature deliberation pondered,
and libertie granted to every man to speak his minde;
what could be said further, for the full satisfaction of all
men.
</p>

<p>
The matter was put to voicing, in these words: <hi rend='italic'>Whether
the five articles of</hi> Perth, <hi rend='italic'>by the confession of Faith, as it was
meaned and professed in the year 1580. 1581. 1590. 1591. ought to be
removed out of this Kirk:</hi> The whole Assembly all in one consent,
one onely excepted, did voice that the five articles above
specified were abjured by this Kirk, in that Confession,
and so ought to be removed out of it: And therefore prohibiteth
and dischargeth all disputing for them, or observing
of them, or any of them, in all time comming, and ordains
Presbyteries to proceed with the censures of the Kirk against
all transgressours.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Act. Sess. 21. December 17. 1638.</head>

<p>
Concerning <hi rend='italic'>Kirk Sessions, provinciall</hi>
and <hi rend='italic'>nationall Assemblies</hi>,
the generall Assembly considering the great defection
of this Kirk, and decay of Religion, by the usurpation
of the Prelates, and their suppressing of ordinaire judicatories
of the Kirk, and clearly preceiving the benefit which
will redound to the Religion by the restitution of the said judicatories,
remembring also that they stand obliged by their
solemne oath, and covenant with God, to return to the doctrine
and discipline of this Kirk; as it was profest 1580,
1581, 1590, 1591. which in the book of Policie, registrat
in the books of the Assembly 1581. and ordained to be subscribed,
1590, 1591. is particularly exprest both touching
the constitution of the Assemblies, of their members,
Ministers, and Elders, and touching the number, power,
and authority of these members, in all matters ecclesiastical.
</p>

<pb n="042"/><anchor id="Pg042"/>

<p>
The Assembly findeth it necessar to restore, and by these
presents restoreth all these Assemblies unto their full integritie
in their members, priviledges, liberties, powers, and
jurisdictions; as they were constitute by the foresaid book
of Policie.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Act. Sess. 23, 24. December 17. 18.</head>

<p>
Anent the report of the Committie, appointed for considering
what constitutions were to be revived, or made
of new, they proponed the overtures following: which
were read and allowed by the whole Assembly, or by them
referred to the consideration of the severall Presbyteries.
</p>

<p>
Anent <hi rend='italic'>Presbyteries</hi> which have been erected since the year
1586. It seemeth needfull, that they bee ratified by an act
of this generall Assembly, and that other Presbyteries shall
be erected, where they shall be found needfull, and especially
now in the Synod of <hi rend='italic'>Lismore</hi>, according to the particular
note given there anent.
</p>

<p>
The Assembly ratifieth these Presbyteries since 1486. and
erected those in <hi rend='italic'>Lismore</hi>, conforme to the note registrat in
the books of Assembly.
</p>

<p>
Anent the keeping of <hi rend='italic'>Presbyteriall meetings</hi>; It is thought
fit that they be weekly, both in Sommer and Winter, except
in places farre distant, who during the winter season,
(that is between the first of <hi rend='italic'>October</hi>
and the first of <hi rend='italic'>April</hi>) shall
be dispensed with for meeting once in the fourteen dayes,
and that all absents be censured, especially those who should
<hi rend='italic'>exercise</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>adde</hi>, according to the Act of Assembly 1582.
at St. <hi rend='italic'>Andrews</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>April 24. Sess. 12.</hi> and that some controverted
head of doctrine bee handled in the presbyterie publikly,
and disputed among the brethren, every first Presbyterie
of the Moneth, according to the act of Assembly holden at
<hi rend='italic'>Dundie</hi> 1598. Sess. 12.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Assembly alloweth this Article.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Anent the <hi rend='italic'>visitation of particular Kirks</hi> within Presbyteries;
It is thought expedient that it be once every year, wherein a
care is to be had, among other things necessary, that it bee
<pb n="043"/><anchor id="Pg043"/>
tryed, how domestick exercises of Religion be exercised in
particular families, and to see what means there is in every
Parish in Landward, for catechising and instructing the
youth.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Assembly alloweth this article.</hi>
</p>

<p>
IV. Anent the <hi rend='italic'>visitation of Kirks, Schooles, and Colledges</hi>:
It is thought meet that the acts of Assembly holden at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>
the 25. of <hi rend='italic'>Junie</hi> 1565. Sess. 2. be put in execution: that
the Ministers of the parochin, the Principall, <hi rend='italic'>Regents</hi>, and
<hi rend='italic'>professours</hi> within Colledges, and <hi rend='italic'>Masters</hi>,
and Doctors of Schooles, be tryed concerning the soundnesse of their judgement
in matters of Religion, their abilitie, for discharge
of their calling, and the honesty of their conversation: as
the act of Assembly at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Juni 21. 1567.</hi> Sess. 3. And
the act of the Assembly holden at <hi rend='italic'>Montrose</hi>. 1595. Sess. 9.
do import: and this visitation of Colledges to be by way of
commission from the generall Assembly.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The generall Assembly alloweth this article.</hi>
</p>

<p>
V. Anent <hi rend='italic'>none residents</hi>: It is thought necessary, that every
Minister be oblished to reside in his own Parochin at his
ordinarie Manse, for the better attending of the duties of his
calling, conforme to the Acts of Assemblies, viz. act of
Assembly at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>March 24. 1595.</hi> Sess. 7. as also act
at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>December
25. 1563.</hi> Sess. 5. and Assembly at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>December 25. 1565.</hi> Sess. 4. Assembly at
<hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>March 6. 1572.</hi> Sess. 3.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Assembly alloweth this article.</hi>
</p>

<p>
VI. Anent the <hi rend='italic'>planting of Schools in Landward</hi>, the want
whereof doth greatly prejudge the grouth of the Gospel and
procure the decay of Religion: The Assembly giveth direction
to several Presbyteries for the setling of Schooles in
every Landward Parochin, and providing of men able for
the charge of teaching of the youth, publick reading and precenting
of the Psalme, and the catechising of the common
people, and that means be provided for their intertainment,
in the most convenient manner that may be had, according
to the abilitie of the Parochin.
</p>

<pb n="044"/><anchor id="Pg044"/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Assembly alloweth; and referreth the particular course
unto the severall Presbyteries.</hi>
</p>

<p>
VII. Anent the late <hi rend='italic'>admission of Ministers by Presbyteries</hi>,
and the <hi rend='italic'>choise of Moderatours</hi>, according to the ancient power
of the said Presbyteries: The Assembly declareth they had
power to doe the same, and ratifieth that what hath been done
of late of that kinde upon warrantable grounds, that here
after it be not called in question.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Assembly alloweth this article.</hi>
</p>

<p>
VIII. Anent the <hi rend='italic'>competencie of Presbyteries and parochins</hi>,
that some proportion may be keeped, both anent the number
and distance of place: It would seem expedient that this
generall Assembly should appoint a Commission for every
Shyre, where there is such necessitie, that the particular
Parochins and Presbyteries within the bounds be duely considered,
and overtures be these of the same commission given
in to the provinciall Synods, and by them to the generall
Assembly, that there they may be advised, and ratified.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Assembly referreth this to the care of the particular
presbyteries.</hi>
</p>

<p>
IX. Anent the <hi rend='italic'>entrie and conversation of Ministers</hi>: It is
expedient that the act of Assembly holden at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>March 24. 1595.</hi> Sess. 7. be ratified, and put in execution
in every Presbyterie, and to that end, that they get a coppie
thereof, under the Clerks hand whereof the tennour
followeth.
</p>

<p>
Act Sess. 7. March 26. of the Assembly at
<hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi> 1596.
</p>

<p>
<q><hi rend='italic'>Concerning the</hi> defections in the ministerie,
<hi rend='italic'>the same being
at length read out, reasoned, and considered; The brethren
concluded the same, agreeing there-with: and in respect
that by Gods grace, they intend reformation, and to see the Kirk
and ministery purged; to the effect the worke may have better successe,
they think it necessar that this Assembly be humbled, for
wanting such care as became in such points, as is set down; and
<pb n="045"/><anchor id="Pg045"/>
some zealous and godly brethren in doctrine, lay them out for their
better humiliation; and that they make solemne promise before the
Majestie of God; and make new covenant with him for a more
carefull and reverent discharge of their ministerie. To the which
effect was chosen</hi> Mr. John Davidson; <hi rend='italic'>and Twesday next at
nine houres in the morning appointed, in the new Kirk, for that effect:
whereunto none is to resort, but the ministrie: the forme to
bee advised the morne in privie conference.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
The tennour of the advise of the brethren; depute for
penning the enormities and corruptions in the ministerie,
and remead thereof, allowed by the generall
Assembly here conveened. 1596.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Corruptions in the office.</hi>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
<q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>For as much as by
the too sudden admission and light tryall of
persons to the ministrie, cometh to passe that many scandals
fall out in the persons of ministers: it would be ordained in time
comming, that more diligent inquisition and triall be used of all
such persons as shall enter into the ministrie.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>As specially these points.
That the intrant shall be posed upon
his conscience, before the great God, (and that in most grave
manner) what moveth him to accept the office and charge of the
ministrie upon him.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>That it be inquired, if
any by solistation, or moyen, directly or
indirectly, prease to enter in the said office: And, if it bee found,
that the solister be repelled; and that the Presbyterie repell all
such of their number from voting in the election or admission as
shall bee found moyeners for the soliciter, and posed upon their
conscience to declare the truth to that effect.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>Thirdly, because by
presentations, many forcibly are thrust
into the ministery, and upon Congregations, that utter thereafter
that they were not called by God: It would bee provided that none
seeke presentations to Benefices without advice of the Presbyterie
within the bounds whereof the benefice is, and if any doe in the
contrarie, they to be repelled as</hi> rei ambitus.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>That the triall of
persons to be admitted to the ministrie hereafter,
consist not only in their learning and abilitie to preach, but
also in conscience, and feeling, and spiritual wisedome, and namely
in the knowledge of the bounds of their calling in doctrine,
<pb n="046"/><anchor id="Pg046"/>
discipline, and wisedome, to behave himselfe accordingly with
the diverse ranks of persons within his flock, as namely with
Atheists, rebellious, weak consciences, and such other, wherein
the pastoral charge is most suited, and that he be meet to
stop the mouthes of the adversaries; and such as are not qualified
in these points to be delayed to further tryal; and while they be
found qualified. And because men may be found meet for some
places who are not meet for other, it would be considered, that the
principall places of the Realme be provided by men of most worthie
gifts, wisedome and experience, and that none take the charge
of greater number of people nor they are able to discharge: And the
Assembly to take order herewith, and the act of the provinciall of
Louthain, made at</hi> Linlithgow, <hi rend='italic'>to be urged.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>That such as shall bee
found not given to their book and studie
of Scriptures, not Carefull to have books, not given to sancification
and prayer, that studie not to bee powerful and spiritual,
not applying the doctrine to corruptions, which is the pastorall
gift, obscure and too scholastick before the people, cold, and wanting
of spiritual zeal, negligent in visiting of the sick, and caring
for the poore; or indifferent in chosing of parts of the word not meetest
for the flock, flatterers and dissembling at publick sins, and
specially of great personages in their congregations, for flattery,
or for fear, that all such persons bee censured, according to the
degree of their faults, and continuing therein, bee deprived.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>That such as be slothfull
in the ministration of the Sacraments
and irreverent, as prophaners receiving the cleane and uncleane,
ignorants and senselesse prophane, and making no conscience
of their profession in their calling and families, omitting due
tryall or using none, or light tryall, having respect in their tryall
to persons, wherein there is manifest corruption; that all such
bee sharply rebuked, and if they continue therein, that they be
deposed.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>And if any be found a seller
of the Sacraments, that hee bee
deposed</hi> simpliciter: <hi rend='italic'>and such as collude with slanderous persons
in dispensing and over-seeing them for money, incurre the
like punishment. That every Minister be charged to have a Session
established of the meettest men in his Congregation, and that
Discipline strike not only upon grosse sins, as whoredome,
blood-shed, &amp;c. but upon sins repugnant to the word of God,
<pb n="047"/><anchor id="Pg047"/>
as blasphemie of God, banning, profaning of the Sabbath, disobedient
to parents, idle, unruly ones without calling, drunkards,
and such like deboshed men, as make not conscience of
their life and ruling of their families, and specially of education
of their children, lying, slandering, and backbiting and breaking
of promises: and this to be an universal order throughout the
Realme, &amp;c. and such like as are negligent herein, and continue
therein after admonition, be deposed.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>That none falling in
publick slanders, be received in the fellowship
of the Kirk, except his Minister have some appearance
and warrand in conscience, that hee hath both a feeling of sin,
and apprehension of mercie, and for this effect, that the Minister
travell with him, by doctrine, and private instruction to
bring him here-to, and specially in the doctrine of repentance,
which being neglected, the publick place of repentance is turned
in a mocking.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<q><hi rend='italic'>Dilapidation of benefices, dimitting of them for favour, or
money, that they become laick patronages, without advise of the
Kirk, and such like interchanging of benefices, by transaction
and transporting of themselves by that occasion, without the
knowledge of the Kirk, precisely to be punished: Such like, that
setting of acts without the consent of the Assembly, be punished
according to the acts: and that the dimitters in favours for money,
or otherwise to the effect above-writen: bee punished as the</hi> dilapidators.</q>
</p>
</quote>

<p>
Corruptions in their persons and lives.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
<q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>That such as are light
and wanton in their behaviour, as in
gorgeous and light apparell; in speech, in using light and
prophane companie, unlawfull gaming, as dancing, carding,
dycing and such like; not beseeming the gravitie of a Pastour, bee
sharply and gravely reproved by the Presbyterie, according to the
degree thereof: and continuing therein after due admonition, that
hee bee depryved, as slanderous to the Gospel.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>That Ministers being found
swearers, or banners, prophaners;
of the Sabbath, drunkards, fighters, guiltie of all these
or any of them, be deposed simpliciter; and suchlike, lyars, detracters,
flatterers, breakers of promise, brawlers, and quarrellers,
after admonition continuing therein, incurre the same
punishment.</hi></q>
</p>

<pb n="048"/><anchor id="Pg048"/>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>That Ministers given to
unlawful and incompetent trades and
occupations for filthie gain, as holding of ostleries, taking of
ocker beside conscience and good lawes, and bearing worldly offices
in noblemen and gentlements houses, marchandise, and such
like, buying of victuals, and keeping to the dearth, and all such
worldly occupations, as may distract them from their charge, and
may be slanderous to the pastorall calling, be admonished and
brought to the acknowledging of their sins, and if they continue
therein, to be deposed.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>That Ministers not resident
at their flocks, be deposed according
to the acts of the generall Assembly, and laws of the Realme:
otherwise the burthren to be laid on the Presbyteries, and they to
be censured therefore.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>That the Assembly command
all their members, that none of
them await on the court and afairs thereof without the advice
and allowance of their Presbyterie. Item, that they intend no
action civill without the said advice; except in small maters: and
for remeding of the necessitie, that some Ministers hath to enter
in plea of law, that remedie bee craved, that short processe bee
devised, to bee used in Ministers actions.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>That Ministers
take speciall care in using godly excercises in
their families, in teaching of their wives, children, and servants,
in using ordinarie prayers and reading of Scriptures,
in removing of offensive persons out of their families, and such like
other points of godly conversation, and good example, &amp; that they
at the visitation of their Kirks, try the Ministers families in these
points foresaid, and such as are found negligent in these points,
foresaid after due admonition, shall be adjudged unmeet to govern
the house of God, according to the rule of the Apostle.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>That Ministers in
all companies strive to bee spirituall and profitable,
and to talke of things pertaining to godlinesse, as namely
of such as may strengthen us in Christ, instruct us in our calling, of
the means how to have Christs Kingdome better established in our
Congregations, and to know how the Gospel flourisheth in our
flocks, and such like others the hinderances, and the remeeds that we
finde, &amp;c. wherein there is manifold corruptions, both in our companying
with our selves, and with others: and that the contraveeners
thereof be tryed, and sharply be rebuked.</hi></q>
</p>

<pb n="049"/><anchor id="Pg049"/>

<p>
<q><hi rend='italic'>That no Minister be found to contenance, procure, or assist a
publick offender challenged by his own Ministers, for his publick
offence, or to bear with him, as though his Minister, were too
severe upon him, under pain of admonition and rebuking.</hi></q>
</p>
</quote>

<p>
Anent generall Assemblies.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
<q><hi rend='italic'>To urge the keeping of the Acts anent the keeping of the Assembly,
that it may have the own reverence and majestie&mdash;</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Assembly having heard the whole act read, most unanimously
alloweth and approveth this article.</hi>
</p>
</quote>

<p>
X. Anent the defraying of the expenses of the Commissioners
to the generall Assembly, referreth and recommendeth
the same unto the particular Presbyterie, and especially
to the ruling Elders therein, that they may take such
courses whereby, according to reason and former acts of
Assemblies, the Commissioners expenses to this Assembly,
and to the subsequent, may be born by the particular parochins
of every Presbyterie, who sendeth them in their name,
and to their behalf, and for that effect, that all sort of persons
able in land or moneys proportionally, may bear a part
of the burthen, as they reap the benefit of their paines.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>The Assembly referreth this
unto the care of the particular Presbyteries.</hi>
</quote>

<p>
XI. Anent the <hi rend='italic'>repressing of poperie and superstition</hi>; It seemeth
expedient that the number and names of all the <hi rend='italic'>Papists</hi> in
this Kingdome be taken up at this Assembly, if it may be
conveniently done, and if not, that it be remitted to the
next provincial Assemblies, that it may appear what grouth
poperie hath had, and now hath through this Kingdome,
what <hi rend='italic'>popish priests</hi>, and
<hi rend='italic'>Jesuit</hi> there be in the land; and that all
persons of whatsoever state and condition, be obliged to
swear and subscribe the confession of Faith, as it is now condescended
upon by this general Assembly, that they frequent
the word and Sacraments in the ordinar dyets and places,
otherwise to proceed against them with the censures of the
Kirk, and that children be not sent out of the countrey without
<pb n="050"/><anchor id="Pg050"/>
license of the Presbyteries or provinciall Synods of the
bounds where they dwell.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>The Assembly referreth this article to the severall Presbyteries.</hi>
</quote>

<p>
XII. Anent order to be taken that the <hi rend='italic'>Lords Supper be
more frequently administrat</hi> both in burgh and landward, then
it hath been in the year by gone: It were expedient that
the act at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi> <hi rend='italic'>December 25.
1562.</hi> Sess. 5. bee renewed,
and some course bee taken for furnishing of the elements,
where the Minister of the Parish hath allowance only for
once in the year.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>The Assembly referreth this to the consideration of Presbyteries,
and declareth that the charges be rather payed out
of that dayes collection, then that the Congregation want
the more frequent use of the sacrament.</hi>
</quote>

<p>
XIII. Anent the entrie of Ministers to the ministrie:
The Assembly thinks expedient that the act holden at St.
<hi rend='italic'>Andrews</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>April 24.
1582.</hi> Sess. 7. Touching the age of
<hi rend='italic'>twenty five years</hi> be renewed, and none to be admitted before
that time, except such as for rare and singular qualities shall
be judged by the general or provincial Assembly to be meet
and worthie thereof.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>The Assembly approveth this article.</hi>
</quote>

<p>
XIV. Anent <hi rend='italic'>mercats on Monday and Saturday</hi> within Burghs,
causing intollerable profanation of the Lords Day, by carying
of loads, bearing of Burthens; and other work of that
kinde: It were expedient for the redresse thereof, that the
care for restraining of this abuse be recommended by the Assembly
unto the severall Burghs, and they to bee earnestly
entreated to finde out some way for the repressing of this
evill, and changing of the day; and to report their diligence
there anent to the next generall Assembly.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>The Assembly referreth this article to the consideration of the
Burrows.</hi>
</quote>

<p>
XV. Anent <hi rend='italic'>the profanation of the Sabbath day in Landward</hi>,
especially for want of divine service in the afternoone: The
Assembly ordaineth the act of Assembly holden at <hi rend='italic'>Dundie,
<pb n="051"/><anchor id="Pg051"/>
July 12. 1580.</hi> Sess. 10. for keeping both dyets, to be put
in execution.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>The Assembly alloweth this article.</hi>
</quote>

<p>
XVI. Anent <hi rend='italic'>frequenting with excommunicat persons</hi>: The
Assembly ordaineth that the act at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>March 5. 1569.</hi>
Sess. 10. to wit, <hi rend='italic'>That these who will not forbear the companie of
excommunicat persons after due admonition, be excommunicat themselves,
except they forbear</hi>, to be put in execution.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>The Assembly alloweth this article.</hi>
</quote>

<p>
XVII. Whereas the <hi rend='italic'>confession of the Faith</hi> of this Kirk,
concerning both Doctrine and Discipline, so often called
in question by the corrupt judgement and tyrannous authoritie
of the pretended Prelats, is now clearly explained, and
by this whole Kirk represented by this generall Assembly
concluded, ordained also to bee subscribed by all sorts of
persons within the said Kirk and Kingdome: The Assembly
constitutes, and ordaines, that from henceforth no sort of
person, of whatsoever quality and degree, be permitted to
speak, or write against the said Confession, this Assembly,
or any act of this Assembly, and that under the paine of incurring
the censures of this Kirk.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>The Assembly alloweth this Article.</hi>
</quote>

<p>
XVIII. Anent <hi rend='italic'>voicing in Kirk Sessions</hi>: It is thought
expedient that no Minister moderating his Session, shall usurpe
a <hi rend='italic'>negative</hi> voice over the members of his Session, and
where there is two or moe Ministers in one Congregation,
that they have equall power in voicing, that one of them
hinder not the reasoning or voicing of any thing, whereunto
the other Minister or Ministers, with a great part of the
Session inclineth, being agreeable to the acts and practise
of the Kirk, and that one of the Ministers without advice of
his colleague appoint not dyets of Communion nor examination,
neither hinder his colleague from catechising and using
other religious exercises as oft as he pleaseth.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>The Assembly referreth this article to
the care of the Presbyteries.</hi>
</quote>

<p>
XX. Since the <hi rend='italic'>office of Diocesane</hi>, or lordly Bishop, is utterly
abjured, and removed out of this Kirk: It is
<pb n="052"/><anchor id="Pg052"/>
thought fit that all titles of dignitie, favouring more of poperie
than of Christian libertie, as <hi rend='italic'>Chapters</hi> with their elections
and consecrations, <hi rend='italic'>Abbots</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Priors</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Deans</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Arch-deacons</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Preaching-deacons</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Chanters</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Subchanters</hi>, and others having
the like title, flowing from the Pope and canon law only, as
testifieth the second book of Discipline, bee also banished
out of this reformed Kirk, and not to bee usurped or used
hereafter under ecclesiastical censure.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>The Assembly alloweth this Article.</hi>
</quote>

<p>
XX. Anent the <hi rend='italic'>presenting either of Pastours
or Readers and School-masters</hi>,
to particular Congregations, that there be a respect
had to the Congregation, &amp; that no person be intruded in any
office of the Kirke, contrare to the will of the congregation
to which they are appointed.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>The Assembly alloweth this article.</hi>
</quote>

<p>
XXI. Anent <hi rend='italic'>Mariage without proclamation of bans</hi>, which
being in use these years by-gone hath produced many dangerous
effects: The Assembly would discharge the same,
conforme to the former acts, except the Presbyterie in
some necessarie exigents dispense therewith.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>The Assembly alloweth this article.</hi>
</quote>

<p>
XXII. Anent <hi rend='italic'>the buriall in Kirks</hi>, the Assembly would
be pleased to consider anent the act of Assembly at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>
1588. Sess. 5. if it shall be put in execution, and to discharge
funeral sermons, as favouring of superstition.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>The Assembly referreth the former part of this article anent
buriall in Kirks to the care of Presbyteries, and dischargeth
all funerall sermons.</hi>
</quote>

<p>
XXIII. Anent <hi rend='italic'>the tryall of Expectants</hi> before their entrie
to the ministrie, it being notour that they have subscribed
the confession of Faith now declared in this Assembly, and
that they have exercised often privatly, and publickly,
with approbation of the Presbyterie, they shall first adde
and make the exercise publickly, and make a discourse of
some common head in <hi rend='italic'>Latine</hi>, and give propositions thereupon
for dispute, and thereafter be questioned by the Presbyterie
upon questions of controversie, and chronologie,
anent particular texts of Scripture how they may be interpreted
<pb n="053"/><anchor id="Pg053"/>
according to the analogie of Faith, and reconciled, and
that they be examined upon their skill of the
<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi> &amp; <hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>,
that they bring a testificat of their life and conversation from
either Colledge or Presbyterie, where they reside.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>The Assembly alloweth this article.</hi>
</quote>

<p>
XXIV. The Assembly having considered the order of
the provincial Assembly, given in by the most ancient of
the Ministrie within every Province, as the ancient plate-forme
thereof, ordained the same to be observed, conforme
to the roll, registrat in the books of Assembly, whereof
the tennour followeth.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The order of the Provincial Assemblies in</hi>
Scotland, <hi rend='italic'>according to the Presbyteries
therein contained.</hi>
</p>

<p>
1. <hi rend='italic'>The Provincial Assembly of</hi> Mers
<hi rend='italic'>and</hi> Tividail.
</p>

<p>
The Presbyteries of<lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Dunce.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Chirnside.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Kelso.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Ersliltoun.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Fedburgh.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Melros.</hi>
</p>

<p>
The bounds.<lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Mers.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Tividail.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>The Forrest.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Lauderdail.</hi>
</p>

<p>
To meet the first time at <hi rend='italic'>Fedburgh</hi>,
the third Twesday of <hi rend='italic'>April</hi>.
</p>

<p>
2. <hi rend='italic'>The Provincial of</hi> Louthian.
</p>

<p>
The Presbyteries of<lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Dumbar.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Hadingtoun.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Dalkeeth.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Peebles.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Linlithgow.</hi>
</p>

<p>
The bounds.<lb/>
east <hi rend='italic'>Louthian.</hi><lb/>
w. <hi rend='italic'>Louthian.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Tweeddail.</hi>
</p>

<p>
To meet the first time at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>
the third Twesday of <hi rend='italic'>April</hi>.
</p>

<p>
3. <hi rend='italic'>The Provincial of</hi> Perth.
</p>

<p>
The Presbyteries of<lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Perth.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Dunkel.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Aughterardor.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Striviling.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Dumblane.</hi>
</p>

<p>
The bounds.<lb/>
The Shyresdome of <hi rend='italic'>Perth</hi> and
of <hi rend='italic'>Striviling Shire</hi>.
</p>

<p>
To meet the first time at <hi rend='italic'>Perth</hi>,
the second Twesday of <hi rend='italic'>April</hi>.
</p>

<pb n="054"/><anchor id="Pg054"/>

<p>
4. <hi rend='italic'>The Province of</hi> Drumfrees.
</p>

<p>
The Presbyteries of<lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Dumfrees.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Penpont.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Lochmabane.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Middilbee.</hi>
</p>

<p>
The bounds.<lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Niddisdaill.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Annandaill.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Ewsdaill.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Eskdail.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Wachopdaill.</hi><lb/>
&amp; a part of <hi rend='italic'>Galloway.</hi>
</p>

<p>
To meet the first time at <hi rend='italic'>Drumfrees</hi>,
the second Twesday of <hi rend='italic'>April</hi>.
</p>

<p>
5. <hi rend='italic'>The Provincial of</hi> Galloway.
</p>

<p>
The Presbyteries of<lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Wightoun.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Kirkubright.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Stanraver.</hi>
</p>

<p>
The bounds.<lb/>
The Shyresdome of <hi rend='italic'>Wigtoun</hi>, and
<hi rend='italic'>Stemartie of Kirkubright</hi>.
</p>

<p>
To meet the first time at <hi rend='italic'>Wigtoun</hi>,
third Twedsay of <hi rend='italic'>April</hi>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Provincial Synod of</hi> Aire <hi rend='italic'>or</hi> Irwing.
</p>

<p>
The Presbyteries of<lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Aire.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Irwing.</hi>
</p>

<p>
The bounds.
The Shyresdome of <hi rend='italic'>Aire</hi>.
</p>

<p>
To meet with the Provincial Synod of <hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>pro hac vice</hi>, the first Twesday of <hi rend='italic'>April</hi>.
</p>

<p>
6. <hi rend='italic'>The Provincial Synod of</hi> Glasgow.
</p>

<p>
The Presbyteries of<lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Pasley.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Dumbartane.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Glasgow.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Hammiltoun.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Lanerik.</hi>
</p>

<p>
The bounds.<lb/>
The Shyr. of <hi rend='italic'>Lennox</hi>, the Barrony of
<hi rend='italic'>Renfrow</hi>, the Shy. of <hi rend='italic'>Clydsdail</hi> over and
nether.
</p>

<p>
To meet with the Provinciall Synod Synod of <hi rend='italic'>Aire</hi>
and <hi rend='italic'>Irwing</hi> at <hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>pro hac vice</hi>.
</p>

<pb n="055"/><anchor id="Pg055"/>

<p>
7. <hi rend='italic'>The Provincial Synod of</hi> Argyl, <hi rend='italic'>desired to bee
erected in several Presbyteries, according
to the note given in.</hi>
</p>

<p>
The Presbyteries of<lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Dunune.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Kinloch.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Inneraray.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Kilmoir.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Skye.</hi>
</p>

<p>
The bounds.<lb/>
The Shyrisdomes of <hi rend='italic'>Argil</hi> &amp; <hi rend='italic'>Boot</hi>,
with a part <hi rend='italic'>of Loohabar</hi>.
</p>

<p>
To meet the first time at <hi rend='italic'>Innereray</hi>,
the fourth Twesday of <hi rend='italic'>April</hi>.
</p>

<p>
8. <hi rend='italic'>The Provincial Synod of</hi> Fife.
</p>

<p>
The Presbyteries of<lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>St. Andrews.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Cowper.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Kirkadie.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Dumfermling.</hi>
</p>

<p>
The bounds.<lb/>
The Shyresdome of <hi rend='italic'>Fife.</hi>
</p>

<p>
To meet the first time at <hi rend='italic'>Cowper</hi> in
<hi rend='italic'>Fife</hi> the first Twesday of <hi rend='italic'>April</hi>.
</p>

<p>
9. <hi rend='italic'>The Provincial Synod of</hi> Angus <hi rend='italic'>and</hi> Merns.
</p>

<p>
The Presbyteries of<lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Meegle.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Dundie.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Arbroth.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Forfair Brechen Merns.</hi>
</p>

<p>
The bounds.<lb/>
The Shyresdomes of <hi rend='italic'>Forfair</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Merns</hi>.
</p>

<p>
To meet the first time at <hi rend='italic'>Dundie</hi>, the third Twesday of
<hi rend='italic'>April</hi>.
</p>

<p>
10. <hi rend='italic'>The Provincial Synod of</hi> Aberdene.
</p>

<p>
The Presbyteries of<lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Aberdene.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Kincairdin.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>All-foord.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Garioch.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Ellan Deer.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Turreffe.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Fordyce.</hi>
</p>

<p>
The bounds.<lb/>
The Shyresdomes of <hi rend='italic'>Aberdene</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Bamfe</hi>.
</p>

<p>
To meet the first time at <hi rend='italic'>new Aberdene</hi> the 3 Twesday
of <hi rend='italic'>April</hi>.
</p>

<p>
11. <hi rend='italic'>The provincial Synod of</hi> Murray.
</p>

<p>
The Presbyteries of<lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Innernes.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Forresse.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Elgin.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Strabogie.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Abernethie.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Aberlower.</hi>
</p>

<p>
The bounds.<lb/>
The Shyresdomes of <hi rend='italic'>Innernes</hi> in part,
<hi rend='italic'>Nairn</hi> in part, <hi rend='italic'>Murray Bamf</hi> in part,
<hi rend='italic'>Aberden</hi> in part.
</p>

<p>
To meet the first time at <hi rend='italic'>Forresse</hi> the last
Twesday of <hi rend='italic'>April</hi>.
</p>

<pb n="056"/><anchor id="Pg056"/>

<p>
12. <hi rend='italic'>The provincial Synod of</hi> Rosse.
</p>

<p>
The Presbyteries of<lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Chanrie.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Taine.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Dingwall.</hi>
</p>

<p>
The bounds.<lb/>
The Shyresdome of <hi rend='italic'>Innernes</hi> in part.
</p>

<p>
To meet the first time at <hi rend='italic'>Chanrie</hi>, the second Twesday of
<hi rend='italic'>April</hi>.
</p>

<p>
13. <hi rend='italic'>The provincial Synod of</hi> Cathnes.
</p>

<p>
The Presbyteries of<lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Dornoch.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Weeke.</hi> or<lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Thurso.</hi>
</p>

<p>
The Bounds:<lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Cathnes.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Sutherland.</hi>
</p>

<p>
To meet the first time at <hi rend='italic'>Dornoch</hi>, the third Twesday of
<hi rend='italic'>April</hi>.
</p>

<p>
14. <hi rend='italic'>The provincial Synod of</hi> Orkney
<hi rend='italic'>and</hi> Zetland.
</p>

<p>
The Presbyteries of<lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Kirkwall.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Scalloway.</hi>
</p>

<p>
The Bounds:<lb/>
The Shyresdome of <hi rend='italic'>Orkney</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Zetland</hi>.
</p>

<p>
To meet the first time at <hi rend='italic'>Kirkwall</hi>, the second Twesday of
<hi rend='italic'>April</hi>.
</p>

<p>
15. <hi rend='italic'>The Provinciall Synod of the Isles</hi>
</p>

<p>
All the Kirks of the North-west Isles, viz. <hi rend='italic'>Sky</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Lewes</hi>,
and the rest of the Isles, which were lyable to the Diocie
of the Isles, except the South-west isles which are joyned to
the Presbyteries of <hi rend='italic'>Argyll</hi>, To meet the
first time at <hi rend='italic'>Skye</hi> the
second Twesday of May.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
That the Minister of the place where the Synodall Assembly
meets shall preach the first day of their meeting, and
give timouse advertisement to the rest of the Presbyteries.
</p>

<p>
It is remembred that of old the Synodall Assemblies that
were nearest to others, had correspondence among themselves,
by sending one or two Commissioners mutually from
one to another, which course is thought fit to bee keeped in
time comming: viz. The Provincials of <hi rend='italic'>Louthian</hi>,
and <hi rend='italic'>Mers</hi>, &amp;c. The Provincials of
<hi rend='italic'>Drumfreis</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Galloway</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>Argyll</hi>,
The Provincials of <hi rend='italic'>Perth</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Fyfe</hi>,
and <hi rend='italic'>Angus</hi>, &amp;c. The Provincials of
<hi rend='italic'>Aberdein</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Murray</hi>. The Provincials
<pb n="057"/><anchor id="Pg057"/>
of <hi rend='italic'>Rosse</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Caithnes</hi>, and
<hi rend='italic'>Orknay</hi>. The Commissioners for
correspondence amongst the Synodals to be a Minister and a
ruling Elder.
</p>

<p>
The Assembly recommendeth to the severall Presbyteries
the execution of the old acts of Assemblies, against the
break of the Sabbath-day, by the going of Milles, Salt-pans,
Salmond-fishing, or any such-like labour, and to
this end revives and renews the act of the Assembly, holden
at <hi rend='italic'>Halyrudehouse</hi> 1602. Sess. 5 whereof the tennor followeth.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<q><hi rend='italic'>The Assemblie considering that the conventions of the people,
specially on the Sabbath-day, are verie rare in manie places, by
distraction of labour, not only in Harvest and Seed-time, but
also every Sabbath by fishing both of whyte fish and Salmond fishing,
and in going of Milles; Therefore the Assemblie, dischargeth
and inhibiteth, all such labour of fishing as-well whyte fish
as Salmond fish, and going of Miles of all sorts upon the Sabbath-day,
under the paine of incurring the censures of the Kirk.
And ordains the Commmissioners of this Assemblie to meane the
same to his Majestie, and to desire that a pecuniall paine may be
injoyned upon the contraveeners of this present act.</hi></q>
</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Act Sess. 14. December 18. 1638.</head>

<p>
The Assembly considering the great necessity of purging
this land from bygone corruptions, and of preserving
her from the like in time coming, ordaineth the Presbyteries
to proceed with the censures of the Kirk, to excommunication,
against those Ministers who being deposed by
this Assembly acquiesces not to their sentences, but exercise
some part of their Ministerial function, refuseth themselves,
and with-draw others from the obedience of the
acts of the Assembly.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="058"/><anchor id="Pg058"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Act. Sess. 25. December 19. 1638.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Against the civil places and power of Kirk-men.</hi></head>

<p>
The generall Assembly, remembering that among other
causes of the application of the confession of Faith to the
present time, which was subscribed in <hi rend='italic'>February</hi> 1638. The
clause touching the civill places and power of Kirk-men, was
referred unto the tryal of this Assembly; entered into a serious
search thereof, especially of their sitting on the bench,
as Justices of peace, their sitting in Session and Councel,
their riding and voting in Parlament: and considering how
this vote in Parliament, was not at first sought nor requyred
by this Kirk, or worthy men of the Ministerie, but being
obtruded upon them, was disallowed for such reasons as
could not well be answered (as appeareth by the conference,
holden at <hi rend='italic'>Halyrude-house</hi> 1599. which with the reasons
therein contained was read in the face of the Assembly) &amp;
by plurality of voices nor being able to resist that enforced
favour, they foreseeing the dangerous consequences thereof,
in the Assembly at <hi rend='italic'>Montrose</hi> did limitate the same by
many necessare cautions: Considering also the protestation
made in the Parliament 1606 by Commissioners from Presbyteries,
and provincial Assemblies, against this restitution
of Bishops to vote in Parliament, and against all civil offices
in the persons of Pastors, separate unto the Gospel, as incompatible
with their spiritual function; with the manifold
reasons of that Protestation from the word of God, ancient
Councels, ancient and moderne Divines, from the Doctrine,
discipline and Confession of Faith of the Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Scotland</hi>,
which are extant in print, and were read in the audience of
the Assembly: Considering also from their own experience
the bad fruits and great evils, which have been the inseparable
consequents of these offices, and that power in the
persons of Pastors separate to the Gospel, to the great prejudice
of the freedome and libertie of the Kirk, the jurisdiction
of her Assemblies, and the powerful fruits of their
spiritual Ministerie; The Assembly most unanimously in
<pb n="059"/><anchor id="Pg059"/>
one voice, with the hesitation of two allanerly, declared,
that as on the one part the Kirk and the Ministers thereof are
oblidged to give their advise and good counsel in matters
concerning the Kirk or the Conscience of any whatsomever,
to his Majestie, to the Parliament, to the Councel, or to
any members thereof, for their resolutions from the word
of God, So on the other part, that it is both in-expedient,
and unlawful in this Kirk, for Pastors separate unto the
Gospel to brook civil places, and offices, as to be Justices
of peace; sit and decerne in Councel, Session, or Exchecker;
to ride or vote in Parliament, to be Judges or Assessors
in any Civil Judicatorie: and therefore rescinds and
annuls, all contrarie acts of Assembly, namely of the Assembly
holden at <hi rend='italic'>Montrose</hi> 1600. which being prest by authority,
did rather for an <hi rend='italic'>interim</hi> tolerat the same, and that
limitate by many cautions; for the breach whereof the Prelats
have been justly censured, then in freedome of judgement
allow thereof, and ordaineth the Presbyteries to
proceed with the Censures of the Kirk, against such as shall
transgresse herein in time coming.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Act Sess. 26. December 20. 1638.</head>

<p>
The Assembly considering the great prejudice which
Gods Kirk in this land, hath sustained these years by-past,
by the unwarranted printing of lybels, pamphlets,
and polemicks; to the disgrace of Religion, slander of
the Gospel, infecting and disquyeting the mindes of Gods
people, and disturbance of the peace of the Kirk, and remembring
the former acts, and custome of this Kirk, as of
all other Kirks, made for restraining these and the like abuses,
and that nothing be printed concerning the Kirk,
and Religion, except it be allowed by these whom the
Kirk intrusts with that charge: The Assembly <hi rend='italic'>unanimously</hi>,
by vertue of their ecclesiastical authority, dischargeth and
inhibiteth all printers within this Kingdome, to print any
act of the former Assemblies, any of the acts or proceedings
<pb n="060"/><anchor id="Pg060"/>
of this Assembly, any confession of Faith, any Protestations,
any reasons <hi rend='italic'>pro</hi> or
<hi rend='italic'>contra</hi>, anent the present divisions and contraversies
of this time, or any other treatise whatsoever which
may concerne the Kirk of Scotland, or Gods cause in hand,
without warrand subscribed by Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Archbald Johnston</hi>, as
Clerk to the Assembly, and Advocate for the Kirk; or to
reprint without his warrand, any acts or treatises foresaids,
which he hath caused any other to print, under the paine of
Ecclesiastical censures to be execute against the transgressours
by the several Presbyteries, and in case of their refusal,
by the several Commissioners from this Assembly: Whereunto
also we are confident, the honourable Judges of this
land will contribute their civill authority: and this to be
intimat publickly in pulpit, with the other generall acts of
this Assembly.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Act. Sess. 26. December 20. 1638.</head>

<p>
The generall Assembly ordaineth all Presbyteries and
Provinciall Assemblies to conveen before them, such as
are scandalous and malicious, and will not acknowledge this
Assembly, nor acquiesce unto the acts thereof: And to censure
them according to their malice and contempt, and acts
of this Kirk: and where Presbyteries are refractarie, granteth
power unto the severall Commissions to summond them
to compear before the next generall Assembly to be holden
at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, the third Wedinsday of Julie, to abide their
tryall and censure.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Act Sess. 26. December 20. 1638.</head>

<p>
The Assembly considering the acts and practise of this
Kirke in her purest times, that the Commissioners of every
Presbyterie, Burgh, and Universitie, were both ordained
to take, and really did take from the Clerk; the
<pb n="061"/><anchor id="Pg061"/>
whole generall acts of the Assembly, subscribed by the
Clerk: Whereby they might rule and conforme their judicatorie
themselves, and all persons within their jurisdictions,
unto the obedience thereof: Considering the great
prejudices we have lately felt out of ignorance of the acts of
Assembly, Considering also the great necessity in this time
of reformation, beyond any other ordinarie time, to have
an extract thereof: The Assembly ordaineth be this present
act, that all Commissioners from Presbyteries, Burghes
and Universities, presently get under the Clerks hand an Index
of the acts, till the acts themselves be extracted, and
thereafter to get the full extract of the whole generall acts,
to be insert in their Presbyterie books, whereby all their
proceedings may be regulate in time coming. Likeas the
Assembly recommendeth unto every Kirk Session, for the
preservation of their particular Paroch from the reentrie of
the corruptions now discharged, and for their continuance
in the Covenant, anent doctrine, worship and discipline
now declared, to obtain an extract of these acts: especially
if they be printed: Seeing their pryce will no wayes then be
considerable: as the benefite both of the particular Parish,
and the interest of the whole Kirk, in the preservation thereof
from defection is undenyable: seeing Presbyteries are
composed of sundry Parochins, and so must be affected, or
infected as they are, as Provinciall and generall Assemblies
are composed of Presbyteries, and so must be diposed
as they are.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Act Sess. 26. December 20.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>In the Assembly at</hi> Glasgow 1638.
<hi rend='italic'>concerning the confession
of Faith renewed in Februar, 1638.</hi>
</p>

<p>
The Assembly considering that for the purging and preservation
of religion, for the Kings Majesties honour, and
for the publick peace of the Kirk and Kingdome, the renewing
of that nationall Covenant and oath of this Kirk and
Kingdome, in Februar 1638. was most necessare, likeas
<pb n="062"/><anchor id="Pg062"/>
the Lord hath blessed the same from Heaven with a wonderfull
successe for the good of religion, that the said Covenant
suspendeth the practise of novations already introduced, and
the approbation of the corruptions of the present governement
of the Kirk, with the civill places, and power of Kirk-men,
till they be tryed in a free general Assembly, and that
now after long and serious examination, it is found that by
the confession of Faith, the five articles of <hi rend='italic'>Perth</hi>, and Episcopall
governement are abjured and to be removed out of
this Kirk, and the civill places and power of Kirk-men are
declared to be unlawfull; The Assembly alloweth and approveth
the same in all the heads and articles thereof, And
ordaineth that all Ministers, Masters of Universities, Colledges,
and Schooles and all others who have not already
subscribed the said Confession and Covenant, shall subscribe
the same with these words prefixed to the subscription
viz., The article of this Covenant which was at the
first subscription referred to the determination of the general
Assembly being now determined at <hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi>, in December
1638. and thereby the five articles of <hi rend='italic'>Perth</hi>, and the governement
of the Kirk by Bishops, being declared to be abjured
and removed, the civill places and power of Kirk-men declared
to be unlawful; We subscrive according to the determination,
of the said free and lawfull generall Assembly
holden at <hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi>: and
ordaineth, <hi rend='italic'>ad perpetuam rei memoriam</hi>,
the said Covenant with this declaration to be insert in the
registers of the Assemblies of this Kirk; generall, Provinciall
and Presbyteriall.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Act Sess. 26. December 20. 1638.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Concerning the subscribing the confession of Faith lately
subscribed by his Majesties Commissioner, and
urged to be subscribed by others.</hi></head>

<p>
Seeing the generall Assembly, to whom belongeth properly
the publick and judiciall interpretation of the confession
of Faith, hath now after accurat tryall, and mature
deliberation clearly found, that the five articles of <hi rend='italic'>Perth</hi>,
<pb n="063"/><anchor id="Pg063"/>
and the governement of the Kirk by Bishops, are abjured
by the confession of Faith, as the same was professed in the
year 1580. and was renewed in this instant year 1638. And
that the <hi rend='italic'>Marques</hi> of
<hi rend='italic'>Hammiltoun</hi> his Majesties Commissioner,
hath caused print a Declaration, bearing that his Majesties
intention and his own, in causing subscribe the confession
of Faith, is no wayes to abjure, but to defend Episcopall
governement, and that by the oath and explanation set
down in the act of Councel, it neither was nor possibly
could be abjured, requiring that none take the said oath,
or any other oath in any sense, which may not consist
with Episcopall governement: which is in-directly repugnant
to the genuine and true meaning of the foresaid Confession
as it was professed in the year 1580. as is clearly now
found and declared by the generall Assembly: Therefore
the generall Assembly: Doth humbly supplicate, that
his Majestie may be graciously pleased, to acknowledge
and approve the foresaid true interpretation, and meaning
of the generall Assembly, by his Royall warrand
to his Majesties Commissioner, Councel, and Subjects,
to be put in record for that effect, whereof we are confident,
after his Majesty, hath received true information
from this Kirk, honoured with his Majesties birth and
baptisme, which will be a royal testimonie of his Majesties
piety and justice, and a powerfull meane to procure
the heartie affection and obedience of all his Majesties
loyall Subjects: And in the meane time, least any should
fall under the danger of a contradictorie oath, and bring the
wrath of God upon themselves and the land, for the abuse
of his Name and Covenant; The Assembly by their Ecclesiastical
authority, prohibiteth and dischargeth, that no
member or this Kirk swear or subscribe the said Confession,
so far wreasted to a contrary meaning, under paine of all
Ecclesiastical censure: but that they subscribe the confession
of Faith, renewed in Februar, with the Declaration of the
Assembly set down in the former act.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n="064"/><anchor id="Pg064"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Act. Sess. 26. December 20. 1638.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Concerning yearly generall Assemblies.</hi></head>

<p>
The Assembly having considered the reasons lately printed
for holding of general Assemblies, which are taken
from the light of nature, the promise of <hi rend='italic'>Jesus Christ</hi>, the
practise of the holy Apostles, the doctrine and custome of
other reformed Kirks, and the liberty of this national Kirk,
as it is expressed in the book of Policie, and acknowledged
in the act of Parlament 1592, and from recent and present
experience; comparing the lamentable prejudices done to
religion, through the former want of free and lawful Assemblies,
and the great benefite arysing to the Kirk, from this
one free and lawful Assembly; finde it necessary to declare,
and hereby declares, that by Divine, Ecclesiasticall, and
Civill warrands, this national Kirk hath power and liberty
to Assemble and conveen in her year-ly generall Assemblies,
and oftner, <hi rend='italic'>pro re nata</hi>, as occasion and necessity
shall require. Appointeth the next Generall Assembly
to sit at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi> the third Weddinsday of Julie 1639.
And warneth all Presbyteries, Universities, and Burghes,
to send their Commissioners for keeping the same. Giving
power also to the Presbytery of <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>pro re nata</hi>:
and upon any urgent extraordinarie necessity (if any
shall happen before the diet appointed in Julie) to give advertisement
to all the Presbyteries, Universities, and Burghes,
to send their Commissioners for holding an occasionall Assembly.
And if in the meane time it shall please the Kings
Majestie to indict a generall Assembly, ordaineth all Presbyteries;
Universities, and Burghes, to send their Commissioners
for keeping the time and place which shall be appointed
by his Majesties Proclamation.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="065"/><anchor id="Pg065"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Ordaining an humble supplication to be sent to the
Kings Majestie.</hi></head>

<p>
The Assembly, from the sense of his Majesties pietie and
justice, manifested in the publick indiction of their solemne
meeting, for the purging and preservation of Religion,
in so great an exigent of the extreame danger of both,
from their fears arising out of experience of the craftie and
malicious dealing of their adversaries in giving sinistrous
informations against the most religious and loyall designes
and doings of his Majesties good Subjects, and from their
earnest desire to have his Majestie truely informed of their
intentions and proceedings, from themselves: who know
them best, (which they are confident, will be better beleeved:
and finde more credite with his Majestie, than any
secret surmisse or private suggestion to the contrarie)
that they may gaine his Majesties princely approbation and
ratification in the ensuing Parliament to their constitutions:
Hath thought meet and ordaineth, that an humble supplication
be directed to his Majestie, testifying their most
heartie thankfulnesse for so Royal a favour, as at this time
hath refreshed the whole Kirk and Kingdome, stopping the
way of calumnie, and humbly supplicating for the approbation,
and ratification foresaid: That truth and peace
may dwell together in this Land, to the increase of his
Majesties glory, and the comfort of quietness of his Majesties
good People: This the Assembly hath committed,
according to the Articles foresaid, to be subscribed by
their Moderatour and Clerk, in their name. <hi rend='italic'>The tennour
whereof followeth.</hi>
</p>

<pb n="066"/><anchor id="Pg066"/>

<p>
To The Kings Most
Excellent Majestie:
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The humble Supplication of the general Assembly
of the Kirk of</hi> Scotland, <hi rend='italic'>conveened at</hi>
Glasgow, <hi rend='italic'>November 21. 1638.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Most gracious Soveraigne,
</p>

<p>
We your Majesties most humble and loyal Subjects,
The Commissioners from all the parts of this your
Majesties ancient and native Kingdome, and members of
the National Assembly, conveened at <hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi>, by your
Majesties special indiction, considering the great happinesse
which ariseth both to Kirk and Common-wealth, by the
mutual embracements of Religion and Justice, of truth
and peace, when it pleaseth the Supreame Providence so to
dispose, that princely power and ecclesiastical authoritie
joyne in one, do with all thankfulnesse, of heart acknowledge,
with our mouthes doe confesse, and not only with
our pennes, but with all our power are readie to witnesse
unto the world, to your Majesties never dying glorie, how
much the whole Kingdome is affected, and not only refreshed,
but revived, with the comfortable sense of your Majesties
pietie, justice, and goodnesse, in hearing our humble
supplications, for a full and free general Assembly: and
remembring that for the present, a more true and real testimonie
of our unfained acknowledgement, could not proceed
from us your Majesties duetyful Subjects, then to
walke worthie of so royal a favour: It hath been our greatest
care and serious endevour, next unto the will of JESUS
CHRIST, the great King of his Kirk redeemed by his own
bloud, in all our proceedings, joyned with our hearty
prayers to GOD, for a blessing from heaven upon your
Majesties Person and government, from the first houre of
our meeting, to carie our selves in such moderation, order
and loyaltie, as beseemed the subjects of so just and gracious
a King, lacking nothing so much as your Majesties personal
<pb n="067"/><anchor id="Pg067"/>
presence: With which had we been honoured and
made happie, we were confident to have gained your Majesties
Royall approbation to our ecclesiastick constitutions,
and conclusions, knowing that a truly Christian minde and
royall heart inclined from above, to religion and piety, will
at the first discern, and discerning be deeply possessed with
the love of the ravishing beautie, and heavenly order of the
house of God; they both proceeding from the same Spirit.
But as the joy was unspeakable, and the hopes lively, which
from the fountaines of your Majesties favour did fill our
hearts, so were we not a little troubled, when wee did
perceive that your Majesties Commissioner, as before our
meeting, he did endevour a prelimitation of the Assembly
in the necessarie Members thereof, and the matters to bee
treated therein, contrarie to the intention of your Majesties
Proclamation indicting a free Assembly according to the
order of this Kirk, and laws of the Kingdome: So from
the first beginnings of our sitting (as if his Lordship had
come rather to crosse, nor to countenance our lawful proceedings,
or as we had intended any prejudice to the good
of Religion), or to your Majesties honour (which GOD
knoweth was far from our thoughts) did suffer nothing, although
most necessarie, most ordinarie, and most undenyable,
to passe without some censure, contradiction, or
protestation: And after some dayes debating of this kinde,
farre against our expectation, and to our great griefe, did
arise himself, commanded us, who had laboured in every
thing to approve our selves to GOD, and to his
Lordship, as representing your Majesties Person, to arise
also, and prohibited our further meeting by such a
proclamation, as will be found to have proceeded, rather
from an unwillingnesse that we should any longer sit, then
from any ground or reason, which may endure the tryal
either of your Majesties Parliament, or of your own royall
Judgement, unto which if (being conveened by indiction
from your Majestie, and sitting now in a constitute Assembly)
we should have given place, This Kirk and Kingdome,
contrare to your Majesties most laudable intentions manifested
<pb n="068"/><anchor id="Pg068"/>
in former proclamations, and contrarie to the desires and
expectation of all your Majesties good people, had been in
an instant precipitate in such a world of confusions, and such
depths of miserie, as afterward could not easily have been
cured. In this extreamitie we made choise rather of that
course which was most agreeable to your Majesties Will revealed
unto us, after so many fervent Supplications, and
did most conduce for the good of Religion, your Majesties
honour, and the well of your Majesties Kingdome; then to
give way to any sudden motion, tending to the ruin of all:
wherein wee are so far from fearing the light, least our
deeds should be reproved, that the more accuratly that we
are tryed, and the more impartially our using of that power,
which God Almighty, and your sacred Majestie, his Vicegerent
had put in our hands, for so good and necessarie ends,
is examined, we have the greater confidence, of your Majesties
allowance and ratihabition: and so much the rather,
that being in a manner inhibited to proceed in so good a
work, we doubled our diligence, and endevoured more
carefully then before, when your Majesties <hi rend='italic'>Commissioner</hi> was
present, in every point, falling under our consideration, to
walke circumspectly, and without offence, as in the sight
of God, and as if your Majesties eyes had been looking upon
us, labouring to proceed according to the word of God,
our confession of Faith, and nationall oath, and the laudable
constitutions of the lawfull Assemblies of this Kirk; and
studying rather to renew, and revive old acts made for the
reformation of Religion, in the time of your Majesties Father,
of happie memorie, and extant in the records of the
Kirk, which divine providence hath preserved, and at this
time brought to our hands; then either to allow of such novations,
as the avarice and ambition of men, abusing authoritie
for their own ends, had without order introduced;
or to appoint any new order, which had not been formerly
received, and sworn to be reteined, in this Kirk. In all
which the members of the Assembly, found so clear and
convincing light, to their full satisfaction, against all their
doubts and difficulties, that the harmonie and unanimitie
<pb n="069"/><anchor id="Pg069"/>
was rare and wonderfull, and that we could not have agreed
upon other constitutions, except wee would have been
found fighting against GOD. Your Majesties wise and
princely minde knoweth, that nothing is more ordinary
then for men, when they doe well, to bee evil spoken of,
and that the best actions of men are many times misconstrued,
and mis-reported. <hi rend='italic'>Balaam</hi>, although a false Prophet,
was wronged: for in place of that which hee said, <hi rend='italic'>The
Lord refuseth to give me leave to go with you:</hi> the princes of
<hi rend='italic'>Moab</hi> reported unto
<hi rend='italic'>Balack</hi>, that <hi rend='italic'>Balaam</hi> refused to goe
with them. But our comfort is, That Truth is the daughter
of time, and although calumnie often starteth first, and
runneth before, yet Veritie followeth her at the heels, and
possesseth her self in noble and royall hearts: where base calumnie
cannot long finde place. And our confidence is,
that your Majestie with that worthie King, will keep one
eare shut against all the obloquies of men; and with that
more wise King, who when he gave a proofe that the wisedome
of GOD was in him to doe judgement, would have
both parties to stand before him at once: that hearing them
equally, they might speed best, and go out most chearfully
from his Majesties face, who had the best cause. When
your Majesties wisedome hath searched all the secrets of this
Assembly, let us be reputed the worst of all men, according
to the aspersions whith partialitie would put upon us, let us
be the most miserable of all men to the full satisfaction of the
vindictive malice of our adversaries, let us by the whole
world bee judged of all men the most unworthie to breath
any more in this your Majesties Kingdome, if the cause that
we maintaine, and have been prosecuting, shall be found any
other, but that we desire that the Majestie of GOD, who is
our fear and our dread, be served, and his house ruled, according to
his owne will; if we have not carried along with us in
all Sessions of our Assemblie, a most humble and loyall respect
to your Majesties honour, which next unto the honour
of the living GOD, lyeth nearest our hearts; if we have not
keeped our selves within the limits of our reformation,
without debording or reflecting upon the constitution of other
<pb n="070"/><anchor id="Pg070"/>
reformed Kirks, unto which wee heartily wish all truth
and peace, and by whose sound judgement and Christian affection
we certainly look to be approven; if we have not failed
rather by lenitie then by rigour in censuring of delinquents,
never exceeding the rules and lines prescribed,
and observed by this Kirk, and if (whatsoever men minding
themselves, suggest to the contrary) the government
and discipline of this Kirk, subscribed and sworn before, and
now acknowledged by the unanimous consent of this Assembly,
shall not bee found to serve for the advancement of
the Kindome of CHRIST, for procuring all duetifull
obedience to your Majestie, in this your Kingdome, and
great riches and glorie to your Crown, for peace to us,
your Majesties loyall subjects, and for terrour to all the
enemies of your Majesties honour and our happinesse: and
if any act hath proceeded from us, so farre as our understanding
could reach, and humane infirmitie would suffer
which being duely examined according to the grounds laid
by your Majesties Father, of everlasting memory, and our
religious Progenitours, and which Religion did forbid us
to infringe, shall merit the anger and indignation, wherewith
wee are so often threatned: But on the contrare, having
sincerely sought the glorie of GOD, the good of Religion,
your Majesties honour, the censure of impietie, and of
men who had sold themselves to wickednesse, and the reestablishment
of the right constitution and government of
this Kirk, farre from the smallest appearance of wronging
any other reformed Kirk, we humbly beg, and certainly
expect, that from the bright beames of your Majesties
countenance shining on this your Majesties own Kingdome
and people, all our stormes shall bee changed in a comfortable
calme, and sweet Sun-shine, and that your Majesties
ratification in the ensuing Parliament, graciously indicted
by your Majesties Proclamation to bee keeped in <hi rend='italic'>May</hi>, shall
setle us in such a firmnesse, and stabilitie in our Religion,
as shall adde a further lustre unto your Majesties glorious
Diadem, and make us a blessed people under your Majesties
long and prosperous reigne; which we beseech him who
<pb n="071"/><anchor id="Pg071"/>
hath directed us in our affaires, and by whom Kings reigne,
to grant unto your Majestie, to the admiration of all the
world, the astonishment of your enemies, and comfort of
the godly.
</p>

</div>

<div>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Collected, visied, and extracted forth of the Register
of the acts of the Assembly by me</hi> Mr A. Jhonston
<hi rend='italic'>Clerk thereto, under my signe and subscription
manuall.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh, the 12.
of Jan. 1639.</hi>
</p>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<pb n="072"/><anchor id="Pg072"/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>The General Assembly, At Edinburgh, 1639.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Sess. 8. August 17. 1639.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Master</hi> George Grahame <hi rend='italic'>his renouncing and
abjuring of Episcopacie.</hi></head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The which day was given into the Assembly, direct from</hi> Master
George Grahame, <hi rend='italic'>sometimes pretended Bishop of</hi> Orknay,
<hi rend='italic'>an abjuration of Episcopacie, subscribed with his hand, which
was publickly read in audience of the Assembly; and thereafter
they ordained the same to be registrat in the assembly Books</hi> ad
perpetuam rei memoriam, <hi rend='italic'>whereof the tenor follows.</hi>
</p>

<p>
To all and sundry whom it effects, to whose
knowledge these presents shall come, specially
to the reverend and honourable Members of the
future Assembly to be holden at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, the
twelfth day of <hi rend='italic'>August</hi> 1639. years: Me Master
<hi rend='italic'>George Graham</hi>, sometime
pretended bishop of <hi rend='italic'>Orknay</hi>, being
sorry and grieved at my heart that I should ever for any
wordly respect have embraced the order of Episcopacie,
the same having no warrand from the Word of God, and
being such an order, as hath had sensibly many fearful and
evill consequences in many parts of Christendome, and particularly
<pb n="073"/><anchor id="Pg073"/>
within the Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Scotland</hi>, as by doleful and deplorable
experience this day is manifest, to have disclaimed,
like as I by the tenor hereof doe altogether disclaime and
abjure all Episcopal power and jurisdiction, with the whole
corruptions thereof, condemned by lawful Assemblies
within the said Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Scotland</hi>, in regard the same is such
an order as is also abjured within the said Kirk, by vertue
of that National Oath with was made in the years 1580. and
1581. promising and swearing by the great Name of the
Lord our God, That I shall never whiles I live, directly
or indirectly, exerce any such power within the Kirk,
neyther yet shall I ever approve or allow the same, not so
much as in my private or publike discourse: But on the
contrary, shall stand and adhere to all the Acts and Constitutions
of the late Assembly holden at <hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi>, the 21. of
<hi rend='italic'>Novemb.</hi> 1638. last by-past, and shall concurre to the uttermost
of my power, sincerely and faithfully, as occasion
shall offer, in execution the said Acts, and in advancing
the Work of Reformation within this Land, to the glory
of God, the peace of the Countrey, and the comfort and
and contentment of all good Christians, as God shall be
my help. In testimony of the which premisses, I have
subscribed thir presents with my hand at
<hi rend='italic'>Breeknes</hi> in <hi rend='italic'>Stronnes</hi>,
the eleventh day of <hi rend='italic'>February</hi>, the year of God 1639.
years, before thir witnesses Master <hi rend='italic'>Walter Stuart</hi>, Minister
at <hi rend='italic'>Shoutronnaldsay</hi>, Master
<hi rend='italic'>James Heynd</hi>, Minister at <hi rend='italic'>Kirkwall</hi>,
Master <hi rend='italic'>Robert Peirson</hi>, Minister
at <hi rend='italic'>Firth</hi>, and Master <hi rend='italic'>Patrick
Grahame</hi>, Minister at <hi rend='italic'>Holme</hi>, my Son.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Sess. 8. August 17. 1639.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act containing the Causes and Remedie of the
by-gone Evils of this Kirk.</hi></head>

<p>
The Kings Majestie having graciously declared, That it
is His Royal will and pleasure, that all questions about
Religion, and matters Ecclesiastical be determined by Assemblies
<pb n="074"/><anchor id="Pg074"/>
of the Kirk, having also by publike Proclamation
indicted this free national Assembly, for setling the present
distraction of this Kirk, and for establishing a perfect peace,
against such divisions and disordres as have been sore displeasing
to his Majestie, and grievous to all his good Subjects.
And now his Majesties Commissioner <hi rend='italic'>John</hi>
Earle of <hi rend='italic'>Traquair</hi>,
intrusted and authorized with a full Commission, being present,
and sitting in this Assembly, now fully conveened
and orderly constitute in all the members thereof, according
to the order of this Kirk, having at large declared His
Majesties zeal to the reformed Religion, and His Royal
care and tender affection to this Kirk, where His Majestie
had both His Birth and Baptisme, His great displeasure at
the manifold distractions and divisions of this Kirk and
Kingdome, and His desires to have all our wounds perfectly
cured with a fair and fatherly hand: And although in the
way approven by this Kirk, tryal hath been taken in former
Assemblies before from the Kirk registers, to our full satisfaction,
yet the Commissioners Grace making particular
enquiry from the members of the Assembly, now solemnly
conveened, concerning the real and true causes of so many &amp;
great evils as this time past had so sore troubled the peace of
this Kirk and Kingdome, It was represented to his Majesties
Commissioner by this Assembly, That beside many other,
the maine and most material causes were, First, The pressing
of this Kirk, by the Prelates with a Service Book, or Book of
Common Prayer, without warrand or direction from the
Kirk, and containing beside the Popish frame thereof, diverse
Popish errors and ceremonies, &amp; the seeds of manifold grosse
Superstitions and Idolatry, with a Book of Canons, without
warrand or direction from the general Assembly, establishing
tyrannicall power over the Kirk in the person of Bishops,
and overthrowing the whole discipline &amp; government of the
Kirk by Assemblies, with a Book of Consecration and Ordination,
without warrand of Authoritie, Civill or Ecclesiasticall,
appointing offices in the house of God, which are not
warranted by the word of God, and repugnant to the discipline
and Acts of our Kirk, and with the high Commission,
erected without the consent of the Kirk, subverting the jurisdiction
<pb n="075"/><anchor id="Pg075"/>
and ordinary Judicatories of this Kirk, and giving
to persons meerely Ecclesiasticall, the power of both swords,
and to persons meerly Civill, the power of the Keys
and Kirk-sensures. A second cause was the Articles of
<hi rend='italic'>Perth</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi>
the observation of Festivall dayes, kneeling at
the Communion, Confirmation, Administration of the
Sacraments in private places, which are brought in by a null
Assembly and are contrary to the Confession of Faith, as it
was meant and subscribed <hi rend='italic'>Anno</hi> 1580, and divers times since
and to the order and constitutions of this Kirk. Thirdly,
the changing of the government of the Kirk, from the Assemblies
of the Kirk to the persons of some Kirkmen, usurping
prioritie and power over their Brethren by the way,
and under the name of Episcopall government against the
Confession of Faith, 1580 against the order set downe in the
Book of Policy, and against the intention &amp; constitution
of this Kirk from the beginning. Fourthly the Civill places
and power of Kirkmen, their sitting in Session, Councell
and Exchequer, their Riding, Sitting, and voting in Parliament,
and their sitting in the Bench as Justices of peace,
which according to the constitutions of this Kirk are incompatible
with their spiritual function, lifting them up above
their Brethren in worldly pomp, and do tend to the hinderance
of the Ministrie. Fiftly the keeping and authorizing
corrupt Assemblies at <hi rend='italic'>Linlithgow</hi>, 1606. and 1608. At
<hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi>, 1610. At <hi rend='italic'>Aberdene</hi>,
1616. At S. <hi rend='italic'>Andrews</hi>, 1617. At
<hi rend='italic'>Perth</hi>, 1618. which ar null and unlawful, as being called
and constitute quite contrary to the order and constitutions
of this Kirk received and practised ever since the reformation
of Religion, and withal laboring to introduce novations
into this Kirk, against the order and religion established.
A sixth cause is the want of lawful &amp; free General Assemblies,
rightly constitute of Pastors, Doctors, and Elders yearly,
or oftner <hi rend='italic'>pro re nata</hi>, according to the libertie of this Kirk,
expressed in the Book of Policy: and acknowledged in the
Act of Parliament, 1592. After which the whole Assembly
in one heart and voyce did declare, that these and such
other, proceeding from the neglect and breach of the Nationall
Covenant of this Kirk and Kingdome, made in <hi rend='italic'>Anno</hi>
<pb n="076"/><anchor id="Pg076"/>
1580. have been indeed the true and maine causes of all
our evills and distractions. And therefore ordain, according
to the constitutions of the Generall Assemblies of
this Kirk: And upon the grounds <hi rend='italic'>respectivè</hi> above-specified,
That the foresaid Service-Book, Books of Cannons,
and Ordinaination, and the high Commission, be
still rejected: that the Articles of <hi rend='italic'>Perth</hi>, be no more practised:
That Episcopall Government, and the Civill places
and power of Kirk-men be holden still as unlawfull in this
Kirk: That the above named pretended Assemblies, At
<hi rend='italic'>Linlithgow</hi> 1606. and 1608.
At <hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi> 1610. At <hi rend='italic'>Aberdene</hi>
1616. At S. <hi rend='italic'>Andrews</hi> 1617.
At <hi rend='italic'>Perth</hi> 1618. be hereafter
accounted as null, and of none effect. And that for preservation
of Religion, and preventing all such evill in time-coming,
Generall Assemblies rightly constitute, as the proper
and competent judge of all matters Ecclesiasticall, heereafter
be kept yearly and oftner, <hi rend='italic'>pro re nata</hi>, as occasion and
necessity shall require; The necessity of these occasionall
Assemblies being first remonstrate to His Majestie by humble
supplication: As also that Kirk Sessions, Presbyteries
and Synodall Assemblies, be constitute and observed, according
to the order of this Kirk.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>After the voycing of the Act (anent the causes of our by gone evills)
His Majesties Commissioner consented verbally to the said Act,
and promised to give into the Clerk in writ, the Declaration of
His consent, and that he should ratifie this Act in the ensuing
Parliament.</hi>
</quote>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Sess. 18. Aug. 26. 1639.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act approving an old Register of the
Generall Assembly.</hi></head>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>The whole Assembly (upon the report made to them anent the old
Register of the Assembly, gotten from Master</hi> John Rig) <hi rend='italic'>all
in one voice approved the said Register, And ordained the same
to make faith in judgement, and outwith in all time coming: as a
true and authentick Register of the Kirk of</hi> Scotland, <hi rend='italic'>conforme
<pb n="077"/><anchor id="Pg077"/>
to the testimonie subscribed by the Committee, to be insert in the
Books of Assembly: whereof the tenor followeth:</hi>
</quote>

<p>
We under subscribers, Forsameikle as the late Generall
Assembly holden at <hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi>, gave power and Commission
to us, To peruse, examine, and cognosce upon the
validity, faith, and strength of the books and Registers of
the Assembly, particularly set down in the Commission
given to us thereanent: According whereunto we did carefully
view, peruse, and consider the saids Registers, and
gave our testimony thereof under our hands, of the validity
and sufficience of the samine, to the said Generall Assembly.
And now having a new Commission given to us from the
Generall Assembly now presently conveened and sitting at
<hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>. To peruse, examine, and cognosce upon the
validity, faith and strength of another Register of the Assembly,
which was not set down and recommended to us
by the said former Commission, which Register beginneth
at the Assembly holden at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>
the sixt day of <hi rend='italic'>March</hi>
1572. and endeth at the Assembly likewise holden at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>
1573. we have carefully viewed, perused, and considered
the said Register: And being deeply and maturely advised,
as in a matter of greatest weight and consequence,
do attest before God, and upon our consciences declare to
the world, and this present Assembly, That the said Register
above exprest, is a famous, authentick, and good Register,
which ought to be so reputed, and have publike
faith in judgement and outwith, as a valid and true Record
in all things, And finds the same to be of the same handwrit,
and subscribed by the same Clerk of the Generall Assembly
as divers of the said other Registers (formerly perused by
us) are. And in testimonie of our solemne affirmation we
have subscribed these presents with our hand, at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi> the
14. day of <hi rend='italic'>August</hi> 1639.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n="078"/><anchor id="Pg078"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Act Sess. 19. August 27. 1639.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act approving the deposition of the Ministers
by the Committees.</hi></head>

<p>
The Assembly, after the receiving of the whole reports
from the Committees, appointed for revising of the
processes and sentences, led, deduced, and pronounced
before, and by the several Commissions granted by the Assembly
at <hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi>, All in one voice approved the saids
whole Processes as orderly proceeded, and the whole sentences
pronounced therein till, as just and lawful decrees,
without prejudice of any favour that can be showne to any
person or persons, against whom the said sentences are pronounced
upon their supplications, or of Justice to such as
complain of their processe, and offers to reduce the same
upon whatsoever reason competent, by the Constitutions
of this Kirk and Kingdome, before the General Assembly
and the Commissioners thereof, they being appointed for
that effect.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Act Sess. 20. Aug. 28. 1639.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act anent receiving of deposed Ministers.</hi></head>

<p>
The which day the General Assembly upon the report of
the Committees anent these who are deposed by Synods,
Doe make this General Act, recommending to the
Synods all these who are deposed befor them for subscribing
of the Declinator, &amp; reading of the Service book and for no
other grosse cause, That upon their true repentance &amp; submission
to the Constitutions of this Kirk &amp; upon their purgation
and clearnesse from any grosse Faults laid to their charge in
any new processe against them, they may be found by the
Synod as capable of the Ministrie, when God grants them an
ordinary and lawful calling by admission from the Presbyterie,
either in the Church they served in before, or in any
other Church.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n="079"/><anchor id="Pg079"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Act Sess. 21. August 29. 1639.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act anent the keeping of the Lords Day.</hi></head>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>The General Assembly recommendeth to the several Presbyteries
the execution of the old acts of Assembly, against the breach
of the Sabbath Day, by going of Mylnes, Salt-Pannes,
Salmond-fishing, or any such like labour; and to this end revives
and renues the act of the Assembly holden at</hi> Haly-rude-house,
1602. <hi rend='italic'>Sess. 5. whereof the tenor follows.</hi>
</quote>

<p>
The Assembly considering that the conventions of the
People, specially on the Sabbath Day are very rare in
many places, by distraction of labour not only in harvest and
seed-time, but also every Sabbath, by fishing both of the
white fish, and Salmond-fishing, and in going of Mylnes.
Therefore the Assembly dischargeth and inhibiteth all such
labour of fishing, as well white fish and Salmond-fish, and
going of Mylnes of all sorts upon the Sabbath, under the
pain of incurring the censures of the Kirk: And ordaines
the Commissioners of this Assembly, to mean the same to
His Majestie, and to desire that a pecunial paine may be injoyned
upon the contraveeners of this present Act.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Act Sess. 22. Aug. 29. 1639. <hi rend='italic'>a Meridie.</hi></head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Articles and Overtures approved by the Assembly.</hi></head>

<p>
That some Commissioners be appointed to visit and peruse
the whole Acts of General Assemblies, and to marke
such Acts as are for the use of the Kirk in General, To extract
the same out of the Registers, to the effect that after they be
tryed, they may be printed according to the old Acts of the
Assembly at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>March 7. 1574.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Sess.</hi> 9.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>The Assembly appoints the Presbyterie of</hi>
Edinburgh, <hi rend='italic'>to have a
care of this article, and to report their diligence to the next
Assembly.</hi>
</quote>

<pb n="080"/><anchor id="Pg080"/>

<p>
That course may be taken for restraining of people from
passing to <hi rend='italic'>England</hi> to marry, which is the occasion of great
in conveniences.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>The Assembly alloweth this article, and recommends to the Parliament,
that they would appoint a pecuniall summe to be payed
by the contraveeners.</hi>
</quote>

<p>
That the Acts for furnishing expences to Commissioners,
sent by the Presbyteries to the General Assembly, and sent in
Commission by Generall Assemblies, may be explained;
And it be declared that all such Commissioners whatsoever,
by their stipends may be furnished by the Kirks of the Presbyterie,
according to the order, set down in the Act of the
last Assembly, since the errand is common, and the benefit
concerneth all: and that order may be taken, how that
an expedient voluntarie course, thought fit by the Assembly,
shall by advise of Parliament, have the force of a law, for
compelling these to pay who are stented, both for the last
and this Assembly and in time to come.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>The Assembly allowes this article, and referres the same to the
Parliament.</hi>
</quote>

<p>
That the Session-books of every Paroche be presented once
a year to the Presbyteries, that they may be tryed by them.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>The Assembly alloweth this article.</hi>
</quote>

<p>
That the Act of the 38. Assembly at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>October 24,
1578.</hi> Sess. 8. ordaining Ministers who are deposed, to be
charged under the pain of excommunication, to dimit their
places, that they may be unquestionably vacand, may now
be renewed.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>The Assembly alloweth this article, and remits the same to the
Parliament.</hi>
</quote>

<p>
The Assembly would revive or renew all former Acts of
Assembly against Papists, and excommunicate persons, against
haunters with them and receivers of them.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>The Assembly alloweth this article.</hi>
</quote>

<p>
That an uniforme Catechisme may be appointed to be used
throughout this whole Kingdome in the examinations before
the Communion.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>The Assembly alloweth this article.</hi>
</quote>

<pb n="081"/><anchor id="Pg081"/>

<p>
That all Ministers or Intrants presented to Kirks, be tryed
before their admission, if they be qualified for the places to
which they are presented, besides the ordinary tryalls of Expectants
before their entrie to the Ministerie.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>The Assembly alloweth this article.</hi>
</quote>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Sess. 23. August 30. 1639.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>The Supplication of the General Assembly to the Kings
Majesties Commissioner, concerning the Book,
called</hi>, The large Declaration.</head>

<p>
We the Members of this present Assembly, for our selves,
and in name of the severall Presbyteries, Burghs,
and Universities, for which we are Commissioners resenting
the great dishonour done to God, our King, this Kirk, and
whole Kingdome, by the Book called, <hi rend='italic'>A large Declaration</hi>,
have here represented the same to your Grace, and have collected
some amongst many of false grosse and absurd passages;
That from the consideration thereof, your Grace, perceiving
the intolerable evills foresaids contained therein, may
be pleased to represent the same to our gracious Soveraigne,
and in our behalfs humbly to beseech his Majestie, so much
wronged by the many foul and false relations, suggested
and perswaded to him as trueths, and by stealing the protection
of His Royal Name and Authoritie to the patrocinie
of such a Book: To be pleased first to call in the said
Book: and thereby to shew his dislike thereof: Next
to give Commission and warrant, To cite all such parties
as are either knowne or suspect to have hand in it, and
to appoint such as His Majestie knowes to be either authors,
informers, or any wayes accessarie, being Natives of this
Kingdome, To be sent hither to abide their tryall and
censure before the Judge Ordinary, and in speciall Master
<hi rend='italic'>Walter Balcanquell</hi>, now Deane
of <hi rend='italic'>Durham</hi>, who is
known and hath professed to be the author, at least a vower
and maintainer of a great part thereof; that by their examplar
<pb n="082"/><anchor id="Pg082"/>
punishment, others may be deterred from such dangerous
courses, as in such a way to raise sedition betwixt the King
and His Subjects, Gods honour may be vindicate from so
high contempt, His Majesties justice may appear, not only
in cutting away such Malefactors, but in discouraging all
such under-miners of His throne, His loyall and loving Subjects
shall be infinitly contented to be cleared before the
world of so false and unjust imputations, and will live hereafter
in the greater securitie, when so dangerous a course of
sedition is prevented, and so will have the greater and greater
cause to pray for His Majesties long &amp; prosperous Reigne.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>His Majesties Commissioner in Councell having received the said
supplication, promised to impart the same to His Majesty, and
to report his diligence therein.</hi>
</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>The Supplication of the Assembly to His Majesties
High Commissioner, and the Lords
of secret Councell.</hi></head>

<p>
Wee the Generall Assembly, considering with all humble
and thankful acknowledgement, the many recent
favours bestowed upon us by His Majestie, and that there
resteth nothing for crowning of His Majesties incomparable
goodnesse towards us, but that all the members of this Kirk
and Kingdom be joyned in one and the same Confession and
Covenant with God, with the Kings Majestie, and amongst
ourselves: And conceiving the main lett and impediment
to this so good a work, and so much wished by all, to have
been the Informations made to his Majestie, of our intentions
to shake off Civil and dutiful obedience due to Soveraignity,
and to diminish the Kings greatnesse and authoritie,
and being most willing and desirous to remove this and
all such impediments which may hinder and impede so full
and perfect an Union, and for clearing of our loyaltie,
WEE in our own names, and in name of all the rest of the
Subjects and Congregations whom we represent, do now
<pb n="083"/><anchor id="Pg083"/>
in all humility represent to your Grace, His Majesties Commissioner,
and the Lords of His Majesties most honourable
privie Councel, and declares before God and the World,
that we never had nor have any thought of with-drawing
our selves from that humble and dutiful obedience to His
Majestie, and to his Government, which by the descent
&amp; under the reign of 107 Kings is most chearfully acknowledged
by us and our predecessors: And that we never had,
nor have any intention nor desire to attempt any thing that
may tend to dishonour of God, or the diminution of the
Kings greatnesse and authoritie: But on the contrary, acknowledging
our quietnesse, stabilitie and happinesse to
depend upon the safety of the Kings Maj. Person, &amp; maintenance
of His greatnesse and Royal authority who is Gods
Vice-gerent set over us, for the maintenance of Religion
and ministration of Justice, We have solemnly sworn and
do sweare, not only our mutual concurrence and assistance
for the cause of Religion, and to the uttermost of our power,
with our means and lives, to stand to the defence of our
dread Soveraigne, his Person and authority, in preservation
and defence of the true Religion, Liberties and Lawes
of this Kirk and Kingdome, but also in every cause which
may concerne His Majesties honour, shall according to the
Lawes of this Kingdome, and the duties of good Subjects
concurre with our friends and followers in quiet manner,
or in armes, as we shall be required of His Majestie, His
Councel, or any having his Authority. And therefore
being most desirous to cleare our selves of all imputation
of this kinde, and following the laudable example of our
predecessors, 1589. do most humble supplicate your Grace,
His Majesties Commissioner, and the Lords of His Majesties
most honourable privie Councell, to enjoyn by Act
of a Councel, that this Confession and Covenant, which,
as a testimony of our fidelity to God, and loyaltie to our King,
we have subscribed, be subscribed by all His Majesties Subjects,
of what rank and quality soever.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="084"/><anchor id="Pg084"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>The Act of the Lords of Councel at</hi> Edinburgh,
August 30. 1639. <hi rend='italic'>containing the</hi> Answer <hi rend='italic'>of the
preceding</hi> Supplication.</head>

<p>
The which day in presence of the Lord Commissioner and
the Lords of privie Councel, compeired personally
<hi rend='italic'>John</hi> Earle of <hi rend='italic'>Rothes</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>James</hi> Earle of <hi rend='italic'>Montrose</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>John</hi> Lord <hi rend='italic'>Lowdoun</hi>,
Sir <hi rend='italic'>George Stirling</hi> of Keir Knight,
Sir <hi rend='italic'>William Douglas</hi> of Cavers Knight,
Sir <hi rend='italic'>Henry Wood</hi> of Bonytoun Knight,
<hi rend='italic'>John Smyth</hi> Burgesse of <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>,
Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Robert Barclay</hi>
Provest of Irwing, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Alexander Henderson</hi> Minister
at Edinburgh, and Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Archbald Johnstoun</hi> Clerk to the
General Assembly, and in the name of the present sitting
General Assembly, gave in to the Lord Commissioner,
and Lords of privie Councel, the Petition above written;
which being read, heard, and considered by the saids Lords,
they have ordained, and ordain the same to be insert and registrate
in the books of Privie Councel, and according to
the desire thereof, ordaines the said Confession and Covenant
to be subscribed in time coming by all His Majesties
Subjects of this Kingdome, of what ranke and quality
soever.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>The Kings Majesties Commissioners
Declarations.</hi></head>

<p>
The which day His Majesties Commissioner, and Lords
of Councel, after the receiving of the Supplication
of the General Assembly, anent the subscribing of the Covenant,
having returned to the Assembly, His Majesties
Commissioner in name of the Councel, declared; That he
had received the Supplication of the Assembly, desiring that
the Covenant might receive the force of an Act of Councel,
to be subscribed by all His Majesties Subjects, that they
had found the desire so fair and reasonable, that they conceived
themselves bound in duety to grant the same; and
thereupon have made an Act of Councel to that effect: And
<pb n="085"/><anchor id="Pg085"/>
that there rested now the Act of Assembly. And that he
himself was so fully satisfied, that he came now as his Majesties
Commissioner to consent fully unto it: And that he
was most willing that it should be enacted here in this Assembly,
to oblige all his Majesties Subjects to subscribe the said
Covenant, with the Assemblies explanation. And because
there was a third thing desired, His subscription as the Kings
Commissioner, unto the Covenant, which he behoved to
do, with a Declaration in writ, and he declared as a Subject,
he should subscribe the Covenant as strictly as any,
with the Assemblies Declaration; but as His Majesties Commissioner
in his name behoved to prefix to his subscription,
the Declaration following, which no <hi rend='italic'>Scots</hi> Subjects should
subscribe, or have the benefit of, no not himself as Earle of
<hi rend='italic'>Traquair</hi>. The tenor whereof follows:
</p>

<p>
Seeing this Assembly, according to the laudable form and
custome heretofore kept in the like cases, have in an
humble and dutiful way, supplicate to us His Majesties
Commissioner, and the Lords of His most honourable
Privie Councel, That the Covenant, with the explanation
of this Assembly, might be subscribed: And to that effect
that all the Subjects of this Kingdome by Act of Councel be
required to doe the same: And that therein for vindicating
themselves from all suspitions of disloyaltie, or derogating
from the greatnesse and authoritie of our dread Soveraigne,
have therewith added a Clause, whereby this Covenant is
declared one in substance with that which was subscribed
by His Majesties Father of blessed memory 1580, 1581,
1590. and oftner since renewed. Therefore I as His Majesties
Commissioner, for the full satisfaction of the Subjects,
and for settling a perfect Peace in Church and Kingdome,
doe according to my foresaids Declaration and Subscription,
subjoyned to the Act of this Assembly of the date
the 17 this instant, allow and consent that the Covenant be
subscribed throughout all this Kingdome. In witnes whereof
I have subscribed the premisses.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="086"/><anchor id="Pg086"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Like as his Majesties Commissioner, read and
gave in the Declaration following, of his consent
to the Act of the Assembly</hi> 17. August, <hi rend='italic'>anent
the causes of our by gone evils.</hi></head>

<p>
I <hi rend='italic'>John</hi> Earle of <hi rend='italic'>Traquair</hi>,
His Majesties Commissioner
this present Assembly, doe in His Majesties Name declare,
that nothwithstanding of His Majesties own inclination,
and many other grave and weightie consideration
yet such is His Majesties incomparable goodnesse, that for
settling the present distractions, and giving full satisfaction
to the Subject, He doth allow, like as I His Majesties
Commissioner do consent to the foresaid Act, and have subscribed
the premisses.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Like as His Majesties Commissioner, read
and gave in the Declaration following:</hi></head>

<p>
It is alwayes hereby declared by me His Majesties Commissioner,
That the practise of the premisses, prohibited
within this Kirk and Kingdome, outwith the Kingdome of
<hi rend='italic'>Scotland</hi> shall never bind nor
inferre censure against the practises
outwith the Kingdome; which when the Commissioner
required to be insert in the Register of the Kirk, and
the Moderator in name of the Assembly, refused to give
warrant for such practise, as not agreeable with a good conscience
His Grace urged, that it should be recorded, at least
that he made such a Declaration, whatsoever was the Assemblies
Judgement in the contrair: And so it is to be understood
to be insert here onely <hi rend='italic'>recitative</hi>.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act ordaining the subscription of the Confession
of Faith and Covenant, with the
Assemblies Declaration.</hi></head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly considering the great happiness
which may flow from a full and perfect Union of this
<pb n="087"/><anchor id="Pg087"/>
Kirk and Kingdome, by joyning of all in one and the same
Covenant with God, with the Kings Majestie, and amongst
our selves, having by our great Oath declared the uprightnesse
and loyaltie of our intentions in all our proceedings, and
having withall supplicated His Majesties high Commissioner,
and the Lords of His Majesties honorable Privie Councell,
to injoyn by Act of Councell, all the Lieges in time coming
to subscribe the Confession of faith and Covenant, which
as a testimony of our fidelity to God and loyaltie to our King
we have subscribed; And seeing His Majesties high Commissioner,
and the Lords of His Majesties honorable Privie
Councell, have granted the desire of our Supplication, ordaining
by Civill authority, all His Majesties Lieges in time
comming, to subscribe the foresaid Covenant, that our Union
may be the more full and perfect, We by our Act and
Constitution Ecclesiasticall, do approove the foresaid Covenant,
in all the Heads and Clauses thereof and ordains of
new, under all Ecclesiasticall censure, that all the Masters
of Universities, Colledges, and Schooles, all Schollers at
the passing of their degrees, all persons suspect of Papistry, or
any other errour; and finally all the members of this Kirk &amp;
Kingdome, subscribe the same with these words prefixed to
their subscription: <hi rend='italic'>The Article of this Covenant, which was at the
first subscription referred to the determination of the General Assembly,
being determined. And thereby the five Articles of</hi>
Perth, <hi rend='italic'>the government
of the Kirk by Bishops, the civill places and power of Kirkmen,
upon the reasons and grounds contained in the Acts of the Generall
Assembly declared to be unlawfull within this Kirk: we subscribe
according to the determination foresaid.</hi> And ordains the Covenant,
with this Declaration, to be insert in the Registers
of the Assemblies of this Kirk, Generall, Provinciall, and
Presbyteriall, <hi rend='italic'>ad perpetuam rei memoriam</hi>; and in all humility
supplicates His Majesties high Commissioner, and the
honourable Estates of Parliament, by their authority, to
ratifie and injoyne the same, under all civill paines, which
will tend to the glory of God, preservation of Religion, the
Kings Majesties honour, and perfect peace of this Kirk and
Kingdome.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="088"/><anchor id="Pg088"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act anent Appellations.</hi></head>

<p>
The Assembly appointed that in all time hereafter, no
Appellations should be leaping over either Presbyterie
or Synod, but to ascend by degrees as from the Kirk Session
to the Presbytry, or from the Presbyterie to the Synod,
and from the Synod to the Generall Assembly, except it be
after the Synod be past, and immediatly before the Generall
Assembly, or in the time thereof, and renews all former
Acts made to this effect.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act anent advising with Synods and Presbyteries
before determination in Novations.</hi></head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly desiring that the intended Reformation
being recovered, may be established, Ordains,
that no Novation which may disturbe the peace of the
Church, and make division, be suddenly proponed and
enacted: But so as the motion be first communicate to the
severall Synods, Presbyteries and Kirks, that the matter may
be approved by all at home, and Commissioners may come
well prepared, unanimously to conclude a solide deliberation
upon these points in the Generall Assembly.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act anent Ministers Catechising, and
Family Exercises.</hi></head>

<p>
The Assembly considering that the long waited-for fruits
of the Gospel, so mercifully planted and preserved in
this Land, and Reformation of ourselves, and Families,
so solemnly vowed to God of late in our Covenant, cannot
take effect, except the knowledge and worship of God be
caried from the Pulpit to every family within each Parish,
<pb n="089"/><anchor id="Pg089"/>
hath therefore appointed that every Minister, besides his
paines on the Lords day, shall have weekly catechising of
some part of the Paroch, and not altogether cast over the
examination of the people, till a litle before the Communion.
Also that in every Familie the worship of God be
erected, where it is not both Morning and Evening, and
that the Children &amp; Servants be catechised at home, by the
Masters of the Families, whereof account shall be taken by
the Minister, and Elders assisting him in the visitation of
every Family: And lest they fail, that visitation of the severall
Kirks be seriously followed by every Presbyterie, for
this end among others. The execution and successe whereof,
being tried by the Synods, let it be represented to the
next Generall Assembly.
</p>

</div>
</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Sess. 24. Aug. 30. <hi rend='italic'>a meride.</hi></head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>The Assemblies Supplication to the</hi>
KINGS MAJESTIE.</head>

<p>
Most Gracious Souveraigne.
</p>

<p>
Wee Your Majesties most humble and loyall Subjects,
the Commissioners from all the parts of this your Majesties
ancient &amp; native Kingdome, and members of the Nationall
Assembly, conveened at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi> by your Majesties
speciall indiction, and honoured with the presence of Your
Majesties high Commissioner, have been waiting for a day
of rejoycing, and of solemne thanksgiving to be rendred to
God by this whole Kirk and Kingdome, for giving us a
King so just and religious, that it is not only lawfull for us
to be Christians under Your Majesties government, which
sometime hath been the greatest praise of great Princes, but
also that it hath pleased Your gracious Maj. to make known
that it is Your Royall will and pleasure, that all matters Ecclesiasticall
be determined in free Nationall Assemblies, and
matters civill in Parliaments; which is a most noble and
ample expression of Your Majesties justice, and we trust
<pb n="090"/><anchor id="Pg090"/>
shall be a powerful mean of our common happinesse under
your Majesties most blessed Reign. In the mean while we
do most humbly, upon the knees of our hearts, blesse your
Majesty for that happinesse already begun in the late Assembly
at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>; in the proceedings whereof, next under
God, we have laboured to approve our selves unto Your
Majesties Vice-gerent, as if Your Majesties eyes had been
upon us, which was the desire of our souls, and would have
beene the matter of our full rejoycing, and doe still continue
Your Majesties most humble supplicants for Your Majesties
civill sanction and ratification of the constitutions of the
Assembly in Parliament; That your Majesties Princely
power, and the Ecclesiasticall Authority joyning in one,
the mutuall embracements of religion and justice, of truth
and peace may be seen in this Land, which shall be to us as
a resurrection from the dead, and shall make us, being not
only so farre recovered, but also revived, to fill Heaven and
Earth with our praises, and to pray that King CHARLES
may be more and more blessed, and His throne established
before the Lord for ever.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Assembly appoints the next Generall Assembly, to sit at</hi>
Aberdene <hi rend='italic'>the last Tuesday of</hi> July <hi rend='italic'>next,</hi>
1640. <hi rend='italic'>years. And
warneth all Presbyteries, Universities and Burrows, to send their
Commissioners, for keeping the same. And thereafter the Assembly
was concluded by giving of thanks by the Moderator, and singing
of a Psalme, according to the custome.</hi>
</p>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<pb n="091"/><anchor id="Pg091"/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>The Generall Assembly, Conveened at Aberdene, July 28. 1640.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Sess. 2. July 29. 1640.</head>

<p>
The Assembly having past the first day before
they would make any Act in attending of His
Majesties Commissioner.
</p>

<p>
This day the Moderator openly asked in face
of the Assembly, if there was any Commissioner
come from His Majestie: And finding there was none,
the Assembly proceeded according to their Liberties.
</p>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Overtures given in by the Committee appointed
by the last Assembly, anent the ordering of the Assembly-house:
Which being read in audience of the Assembly
they approved the same.</hi></head>

<p>
I. The Assembly finds it expedient for the ordering of
the House in all time coming, that the Commissioners
sit together unmixt, and that the places where they sit be
railed about, or some other way divided from the seats of
others, and that places be provided without the bounds of
the Commissioners seats to persons of respect, who are not
<pb n="092"/><anchor id="Pg092"/>
Commissioners, and others according to their qualities, as
the Magistrates of the Town shall find most convenient.
</p>

<p>
II. Also that the Commissioners, having received tickets
from the Magistrates of the Burgh, at the delivery of their
Commissions, whereby they may have ready accesse to the
Assemblie-House and place appointed for them, do keep
the hour of meeting precisely, and whosoever comes after
the time, or shall be found absent at the calling of the Rols,
to be censured as the Assemblie sees fitting: And whatsoever
Presbyterie, Burgh, or Universitie, shall not send
Commissioners, or Commissioners sent from them doe not
come at all to the Assembly, be summond unto the next
Assembly, and censured as the Assembly shall find reasonable.
</p>

<p>
III. That foure persons of respect have warrant from the
Assembly to injoyne that there be no standing, no din, nor
disorderly behaviour; And if any shall disobey them, or direct
his speech to any, except to the Moderator, and that
one at once with leave at first asked and given, to be rebuked
publikely by the Moderator: And if he desist not be removed
out of the Assembly for that Session.
</p>

<p>
IV. That no motion come in unto the Assembly but by
the Committee appointed for matters of that nature: And
if the Committee refused to answer the same, let it be proponed
to the Assembly with the reasons thereof.
</p>

<p>
V. That the minutes of ilk Session be read before their rising,
and if the matter concerne the whole Kirk, let it be
drawn up in forme and read in the beginning of the next ensuing
Session, that the Assembly may judge whether or not
it bee according to their minde.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act anent the demolishing of Idolatrous
Monuments.</hi></head>

<p>
Forasmuch as the Assembly is informed, that in divers
places of this Kingdome, and specially in the North
parts of the same, many Idolatrous Monuments, erected
<pb n="093"/><anchor id="Pg093"/>
and made for Religious worship, are yet extant, Such as
Crucifixes, Images of Christ, <hi rend='italic'>Mary</hi>, and Saints departed,
ordaines the saids Monuments to be taken down,
demolished, and destroyed, and that with all convenient
diligence: And that the care of this work shall be incumbent
to the Presbyteries and Provinciall Assemblies within
this Kingdome, and their Commissioners to report their
diligence herein to the next Generall Assembly.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act against Witches and Charmers.</hi></head>

<p>
The Assembly ordaines all Ministers within the Kingdome,
carefully to take notice of Charmers, Witches, and
all such abusers of the people, and to urge the Acts of Parliament,
to be execute against them: And that the Commissioners
from the Assembly to the Parliament, shall recommend
to the said supreme judicatory, the care of the
execution of the Lawes against such persons in the most behoovefull way.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Sess. 5. Aug. 1. 1640.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act for censuring speakers against the
Covenant.</hi></head>

<p>
The Assembly ordaines, that such as have subscribed the
Covenant and speakes against the same, if he be a Minister,
shall be deprived: And if he continue so, being deprived,
shall be excommunicate: And if he be any other
man, shall be dealt with as perjured, and satisfie publikely
for his perjury.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n="094"/><anchor id="Pg094"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Sess. 10. Aug. 5. 1640.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act against Expectants refusing to subscribe
the Covenant.</hi></head>

<p>
The Assembly ordaines, that if any Expectant shall refuse
to subscribe the Covenant, he shall be declared uncapable
of a Pedagogie, teaching of a School, reading at a Kirk, Preaching
within a Presbyterie, and shall not have libertie of
residing within a Burgh, Universitie or Colledge: And if
they continue obstinate, to be processed.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Generall Assembly appoints the next Assembly, to be in</hi> St.
Andrews <hi rend='italic'>the third Tuesday of</hi> July 1641. <hi rend='italic'>And
that the Moderator in a convenient way, by the secret Councell&mdash;or otherwise as
may best serve, request the Kings Majestie to send his Commissioner to the said
Assembly. And if any exigent fall out, that the Presbyterie of</hi> Edinburgh
<hi rend='italic'>give advertisement for an Assembly</hi> pro re nata.
</p>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<pb n="095"/><anchor id="Pg095"/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>The Generall Assembly, Holden at St. Andrews, and Edinburgh. 1641.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Sess. 1. July 20. 1641.</head>

<p>
John <hi rend='italic'>Earle of</hi> Weymes, <hi rend='italic'>His Majesties Commissioner,
presented His Majesties Letter to the Assembly,
whereof the tenor followeth.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Charles R.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Trustie and welbeloved, Wee greet you
well. It is no small part of Our Royall
care and desires, that the true Reformed
Religion, wherein by the grace of God,
We resolve to live and dye, be settled
peaceably in that Our ancient and native
Kingdome of <hi rend='italic'>Scotland</hi>, and that the same
be truly taught, and universally received and professed by
Our Subjects there, of all degrees. For preventing of all
division and trouble hereafter, We did intend in Our Own
Royall Person, to have been present at this Assembly; but
conceiving it to be unfitting, to detaine the Ministers from
their particular charges, till the time of Our coming to the
Parliament. We have resolved to make knowne unto you
by these, and by Our Commissioner, That in the approaching
<pb n="096"/><anchor id="Pg096"/>
Parliament, it is Our intention by Our authority, to
ratifie and confirm the Constitutions of the late Assembly at
<hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, that they may be obeyed by all Our Subjects
living in that Our Kingdome. And that We will take into
Our Royall consideration, by what meanes the Churches
belonging to Our presentation, when any of them shall happen
to need, may be best provided with well qualified Preachers:
Like as We are not unwilling, to grant presentations
unto such as in these times of trouble have entred into
the Ministerie, providing they have been examined by the
Presbyteries, and approved by them: Because We want not
Our own feares of the decay of Learning in that Church and
Kingdome, We intend also to consider of the best meanes
for helping the Scooles and Colledges of Learning especially
of Divinity, that there may be such a number of Preachers
there, as that each Parish having a Minister, and the
Gospel being preached in the most remote parts of the Kingdome,
all Our Subjects may taste of Our care in that kinde,
and have more and more cause to blesse God that we are set
over them. And finally, so tender is Our care, that it shall
not be Our fault if the Churches and Colledges there flourish
not in Learning and Religion: For which Royall testimonie
of Our goodnesse, We require nothing upon your part, but
that which God hath bound you unto, even that you be
faithfull in the charge committed unto you, and care for
the soules of the people: That you study Peace and Unity
amongst your selves, and amongst the people, against all
Schisme and Faction; and that you not only pray for Us,
but that you teach the People, which We trust are not unwilling
to pay that honour and obedience which they owe
unto Us, as his Vicegerent set over them, for their good;
wherein We expect you will by your good example goe before
them. Which hoping you will doe, We bid you farewell.
<hi rend='italic'>From Our Court at</hi> Whitehall,
<hi rend='italic'>the 10. day of July 1641.</hi>
</p>

</div>

<pb n="097"/><anchor id="Pg097"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Sess. 3. July 28. 1641.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Act approving the Overtures of the Assembly at</hi> Aberdene,
<hi rend='italic'>for ordering the Assembly-House</hi>.
</p>

<p>
The Overtures for ordering the Assembly-House, given
in to, and approved by the Assembly of <hi rend='italic'>Aberdene</hi>
the <hi rend='italic'>29.
July 1640.</hi> Act Sess. 2 were openly read, and again approved
by this Assembly, and ordained to be kept the whole
time thereof.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Sess. 5. July 30. 1641.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act anent old Ministers bruiking their Benefices.</hi></head>

<p>
The Assembly having considered the Supplication given in
by Doctor <hi rend='italic'>Robert Howie</hi>, Provest of the new Colledge of
S. <hi rend='italic'>Andrews</hi>, whereby he craved, that (notwithstanding
of his admission of his charge) he should not be prejudged of
his full provision and maintenance during his life time: The
Assembly thinks it fit and necessary, that his provision and
maintenance should not be diminished, but that he should
injoy the same fully, as before during all the dayes of
his life time, and craveth his dismission to be only but a cessation
from his charge, because of his age and inability: And
declares, that old Ministers and professors of Divinitie,
shall not by their cessation from their charge, through age
and inabilitie, be put from injoing their old maintenance &amp;
dignity. And recommends this and others the like things,
concerning the estate of that Universitie of S. <hi rend='italic'>Andrews</hi>, to
the Parliament, and the Visitation to be appointed from the
Assembly &amp; Parliament. And likewise the Assembly being
informed, that the said Doctor <hi rend='italic'>Howie</hi> hath been very painfull
in his charge, and that he hath divers papers which would be
very profitable for the Kirk: Therefore they think fit, that
the said doctor <hi rend='italic'>Howie</hi> be desired to collect these papers,
which doeth concerne, &amp; may be profitable for the use of the
<pb n="098"/><anchor id="Pg098"/>
Kirk, that the samine may be showne to the Visitors of the
said Universitie.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Sess. 8. Aug. 2. 1641. a meridie.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act against sudden receiving Ministers deposed.</hi></head>

<p>
The Assembly ordaines, that Ministers who are deposed either
by Presbyteries, Synods, or Generall Assemblies, or
Committees from Assemblies for the publike cause of the
Reformation and order of this Kirk, shall not be suddenly received
againe to the Ministerie, till they first evidence their
repentance both before the Presbyterie and Synod, within
the bounds where they were deposed, and thereafter the samine
reported to the next ensuing Generall Assembly.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Sess. 9. Aug. 3. 1641.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Overtures under-written, concerning the Universities and
Colledges of this Kingdome to be represented by the Generall Assembly,
to the Kings Majesty and Parliament, being openly read,
the Assembly approved the saids Overtures, and ordained them
to be recommended to the Parliament.</hi>
</p>

<p>
First, because the good estate both of the Kirk and Commonwealth,
dependeth mainly upon the flourishing of
Universities and Colledges, as the Seminaries of both,
which cannot be expected, unlesse the poore meanes which
they have, be helped, and sufficient revenues be provided
for them and the same well imployed: Therefore that out
of the rents of prelacies; Collegiat or Chapter-Kirks, or
such like, a sufficient maintenance be provided for a competent
number of Professors, Teachers, and Bursers in all
faculties, and especially in Divinitie, and for upholding,
repairing, and enlarging the Fabrick of the Colledges,
furnishing Libraries, and suchlike good uses in every Universitie
and Colledge.
</p>

<pb n="099"/><anchor id="Pg099"/>

<p>
II. Next for keeping of good order, preveening and removing
of abuses, and promoving of pietie and learning, it is
very needfull &amp; expedient, that there be a communion and
correspondencie kept betwixt all the Universities and Colledges.
And therefore that it be ordained, that there be
a meeting once every year at such times and places as shall be
agreed upon, of Commissioners from every University and
Colledge to consult and determine upon the common affairs,
and whatsoever may concerne them, for the ends above-specified,
and who also, or some of their number may represent
what shall be needfull and expedient for the same effect,
to Parliaments and Generall Assemblies.
</p>

<p>
III. <hi rend='italic'>Item</hi>, That special care be had that the places of the
Professors, especially of Professors of Divinity in every University
and Colledge. Be filled with the ablest men, and
best affected to the Reformation and order of this Kirk.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Sess. 10. August 4. 1641.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act against Impiety and Schisme.</hi></head>

<p>
The Assembly seriously considering the present case and
condition of this Kirk and Kingdome, what great
things the Lord hath done for us, especially since the renewing
of our Covenant, notwithstanding our former backsliding
and desertion; and if we shall either become remisse
in the dueties of Piety, or shall not constantly hold and
keep our Religion, unto which we have bound ourselves so
straitly and solemnly, what dishonour we doe unto the
Name of God before men, who have their eyes upon us,
and how great judgements we bring upon our selves, upon
these and the like considerations, The Assembly doth finde
it most necessary to stirre up themselves, and to provoke all
others both Ministers and people of all degrees, not only to
the religious exercises of publike worship in the Congregation,
and of private worship in their families, and of every
one by themselves apart, but also to the duteies of mutual
edification, by instruction, admonition, exhorting one
<pb n="100"/><anchor id="Pg100"/>
another to fordwardnesse in Religion, and comforting one
another in whatsoever distresse; and that in all their meetings,
whither in the way of civill conversation, or by reason
of their particular callings, or any other occasion offered by
divine providence, no corrupt communication proceed out
of their mouth, but that which is good to the use of edifying,
that it may minister grace unto the hearers: And because
the best means have been, and may still be despised or
abused, and particularly the duetie of mutual edification,
which hath been so little in use, and so few know how to
practise in the right manner, may be upon the one part subject
to the mocking of ungodly and worldly men, who cannot
endure that in others, which they are not willing to practise
themselves, and upon the other part, to many errors
and abuses, to which the godly through their weaknes may
fall, or by the craftinesse of others may be drawn into,
such as are Error, Heresie, Schisme, Scandal, Self-conceit,
and despising of others, pressing above the common
calling of Christians, and usurping that which is proper to
the Pastoral Vocation, contempt or misregard of the publike
means idle and unprofitable questions which edifie not,
uncharitable censurings, neglect of duties in particular callings,
businesse in other mens Matters and Callings, and
many such others in doctrine, charity, and manners, which
have dolefully rent the bowels of other Kirks, to the great
prejudice of the Gospel.
</p>

<p>
Therefore the Assembly, moved with the zeal of God against
all abuses and corruptions, and according to their
manifold obligations, most earnestly desiring and thirsting
to promove the work of Reformation, and to have the comfort
and power of true godlinesse sensible to every soul,
and Religion to be universally practised in every Family, and
by every person at all occasions, Doth charge all the Ministers
and Members of this Kirk whom they doe represent,
that according to their several places and vocations, they
endeavour to suppresse all impiety and mocking of religious
exercises, especially of such as put foule aspersions, and
factious or odious names upon the godly. And upon the
other part, that in the fear of God they be aware and spiritually
<pb n="101"/><anchor id="Pg101"/>
wise, that under the name and pretext of religious
exercises, otherwayes lawful and necessary, they fall not
into the aforesaid abuses; especially, that they eschew all
meetings which are apt to breed Error, Scandall, Schisme,
neglect of dueties and particular callings, and such other
evils as are the works, not of the spirit, but of the flesh,
and are contrary to truth and peace; and that the Presbyteries
and Synods have a care to take order with such as transgresse
the one way or the other.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Sess. 14. August 6. 1641. a Meridie.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>Act <hi rend='italic'>anent Novations</hi>.</head>

<p>
Since it hath pleased God to vouchsafe us the libertie of
yearly General Assemblies, It is ordained according to
the Acts of the Assembly at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>
1639. and at <hi rend='italic'>Aberdene</hi>
1640. that no Novation in Doctrine, Worship, or
Government, be brought in, or practised in this Kirk, unlesse
it be first propounded, examined, and allowed in the
General Assembly, and that transgressors in this kinde be
censured by Presbyteries and Synods.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Act. Sess. 15. August 7. 1641.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Overtures anent Bursars, and Expectants.</hi></head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Overtures under-written being openly read in audience of the
Assembly, were approved, and declared by them to be Acts
of the Assembly, in all time coming, to be observed</hi> respective,
<hi rend='italic'>as the samine bears.</hi>
</p>

<p>
The Assembly thinks meet for maintaining of Bursars
of Divinitie, that every Presbyterie that consists of
twelve Ministers shall maintain a Bursar, and where the
number is fewer nor twelve, shall be joyned with these out
of another Presbyterie where their number exceeds; where
<pb n="102"/><anchor id="Pg102"/>
this course is not already kept, it is to be begun without
longer delay, and every Provincial is ordained to give an accompt
of their number of Bursars, that is constantly to be
entertained by their Province, at the next ensuing General
Assembly.
</p>

<p>
II. No expectant shall be permitted to preach in publike
before a Congregation, till first he be tryed after the same
manner, howbeit not altogether with that accuracie which
is injoyned by the act of the Assembly of <hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi> 1638. which
prescribes the order and manner of tryall that is to be kept
with these who are to be admitted to the holy Ministrie: and
none so tryed shall preach in publike, without the bounds
of the University or Presbyterie where he past his tryalls, till
he first make it known to the other Presbyteries, where he
desires to be heard, by a testimoniall from the Universitie
or Presbyterie where he lived, that he hath bin of an honest
conversation, and past his tryalls conform to the order here
prescribed: Which being done in the meeting of the Province
or Presbyterie, where he desires to be heard; he is to
be allowed by them to preach within the bounds of that Province
or Presbyterie, without any further tryall to be taken
of him.
</p>

<p>
III. Expectants being educate in a Colledge that was corrupt,
or under a corrupt Minister, if they themselves have
been known to have been tainted with error, or opposite to
our Covenant, and the blessed Work of Reformation within
this Kirk, the same order is to be kept in admitting them to
the holy Ministrie, or to any place in the Colledges or
Schooles of this Kingdome, that was ordained to be kept in
admission of these Ministers who fled out of the Countrey,
and shew themselves opposite to our Covenant and Reformation.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n="103"/><anchor id="Pg103"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Act Sess. 17. August 9. 1641.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act against unlawfull Bands.</hi></head>

<p>
The Assembly taking to their consideration the question
proponed unto them concerning the Band, the
copy whereof was presented before them from the Parliament,
doth find and declare that Bands of this and the like
nature, may not lawfully be made: By which Declaration
the Assembly doth not intend to bring any censure for what
is past, and by the wisedome and care of the Committee of the
Parliament is taken away, upon any person, who being required
by the Moderator and the Clerk, shall under his
hand declare before them, That as the Assembly doth finde
that the subscribers are not astricted by their Oath to the tenor
of the said Band, so he findeth himself not to be astricted
by his Oath to the tenor thereof; but the intention of the
Assembly is meerly to prevent the like in time coming.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Sess. 18. August 9. 1641. a meridie.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>A Letter from some Ministers in</hi> England
<hi rend='italic'>to the Assemblie.</hi></head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Right Reverend and dear Brethren, now conveened in this
Generall Assembly,</hi>
</p>

<p>
Wee most heartily salute you in the Lord, rejoycing
with you in his unspeakable goodnesse, so miraculously
prospering your late endeavours, both for the restoring
and settling of your own Liberties and Priviledges, in
Church and common wealth (which we heare and hope he
is now about to accomplish) as also for the occasioning and
advancing of the Worke of Reformation among our selves;
for which as we daily blesse the highest Lord, sole Author
of all one good, so doe we acknowledge your selves worthy
Instruments thereof. And for that (besides all other respects)
doe, and ever shall (by the help of God) hold
<pb n="104"/><anchor id="Pg104"/>
you deare unto us, as our own bowels, and our selves obliged
to tender unto you all due correspondence according to
our power, upon all good occasions.
</p>

<p>
And now (dear Brethren) forasmuch as the Church of
Christ is but one body, each part whereof cannot but partake
in the weale and woe of the whole, and of Each other part;
and these Churches of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Scotland</hi>,
may seem both to be imbarqued in the same bottome, to sink and swim together,
and are so near conjoyned by many strong tyes, not
only as fellow members under the same Head Christ, and
fellow-subjects under the same King; but also by such
neighbour-hood and vicinity of place, that if any evil shall
much infest the one, the other cannot bee altogether free:
Or if for the present it should, yet in processe of time it
would sensibly suffer also. And forasmuch as evils are better
remedied in their first beginning, then after they have
once taken deep root; therefore we whose names are here
under-written, in the behalf of our selves, and of many
others, Ministers of the Church of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi> be bold to commend
to your consideration; (being met together in this venerable
Assembly) a difference of great concernment,
which you may please (in brief) thus to understand. Almighty
God having now of his infinite goodnesse raised up
our hopes of removing the yoke of Episcopacie (under
which we have so long groaned) sundry other forms of
Church-government are by sundry sorts of men projected,
to be set up in the roome thereof: One of which (amongst
others) is of some Brethren that hold the whole power of
Church-government, &amp; all Acts thereunto appertaining (as
Election, Ordination, and Deposition of Officers, with Admission,
Excommunication &amp; Absolution of Members) are
by divine Ordinance <hi rend='italic'>in foro externo</hi>, to be decreed by the most
voices, in, and of every particular Congregation, which
(say they) is the utmost bound of a particular Church: endued
with power of Government, &amp; only some Formalities
of solemne execution to be reserved to the Officers (as servants
of the saids Church) if they have any, or if none, then
to be performed by some other members, not in office,
whom the said Church shal appoint thereunto, And that
<pb n="105"/><anchor id="Pg105"/>
every of the said particular Congregations (whether they
consists of few or many Members, and be furnished with
Offices or not) lawfull: may &amp; ought to transact, determine
&amp; execute all matters pertaining to the government of themselves
amongst &amp; within themselves without any authoritative
(though not consulatory) concurrence or interposition of any
other persons or Churches whatsoever, condemning all imperative
and decisive power of Classes, or compound Presbyteries
and Synods, as a meere usurpation. Now because
we conceive that your judgement in this case may conduce
much by the blessing of God, to the settling of this question
amongst us; Therefore we doe earnestly intreat the same at
your hands, and that so much the rather, because we sometimes
hear from those of the aforesaid judgement, that some
famous and eminent Brethren, even amongst your selves,
doe somewhat encline unto an approbation of that way of
government. Thus humbly craving pardon for our boldnesse,
leaving the matter to your grave considerations, and
expecting answer at your convenient leasure, We commit
you, and the successe of this your meeting, to the blessing
of the Almighty, in whom we shall ever remain.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>London, 12 Ju'y. 1641.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Your faithfull Brethren to serve
you in all offices of love.</hi>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>The Assemblies Answer to the English
Ministers Letter.</hi></head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Right reverend and dearly beloved Brethren in our Lord and
common Saviour Jesus Christ.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Wee the Ministers and Elders met together in this Nationall
Assembly, were not a little refreshed and comforted
by the good report which we heard of you, and others
of our Brethren of the Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, by some of our Ministers,
who by the good providence of our Lord had seen
your faces, and conversed with you. But now yet more
comforted by your Letters which we received, and which
<pb n="106"/><anchor id="Pg106"/>
were read in the face of the Assembly, witnessing your
Christian love, and rejoycing with us in God for his great
and wonderfull Work in the Reformation of this Kirk, and
in the beginning of a blessed Reformation amongst your selves,
and that you are so sensible of your communion and
fellowship with us, and to desire to know our minde and judgement
of that which some Brethren amongst you hold,
concerning Kirk-government.
</p>

<p>
We doe with our hearts acknowledge and wonder at the
great and unspeakable wisedome, mercie, and power of our
God, in restoring unto us the truth and puritie of Religion,
after many Back-slidings and defection of some in this Kirk,
&amp; desire not only to confesse the same before the world, and
all other Christian Kirks, but also doe pray for grace to walk
worthy of so wonderful a love: We have been helped by your
prayers, in our weak endeavours, &amp; you have mourned with
us, (we know) in the dayes of our mourning; and therefore
is it that you doe now rejoyce and praise God with us.
Neither are we out of hope, but the same God shall speedily
perfect that which he hath begun amongst you, that your
joy may be full, which is the desire of our soule, and for
which we doe now pray, and in our severall Congregations
will be instant at the throne of grace, for this and all
other spirituall and temporall blessings upon the Kirk and
Kingdome of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, by name, expecting the like performance
of mutuall love from you and others equally minded
with you, for your parts, till a common consent may be
obtained, even that you will recommend the Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Scotland</hi>
by name in your prayers to God. Thus shall we be as one
people, mourning and rejoycing, praying and praising together;
which may be one meane of the preservation of Unity,
and of many other blessings to us both.
</p>

<p>
We have learned by long experience, ever since the time
of the Reformation, and specially after the two Kingdomes have
been (in the great goodnesse of God to both) united
under one Head and Monarch, but most of all of late,
which is not unknown to you, what danger and contagion
in matters of Kirk-government, of divine worship, and of
doctrine, may come from the one Kirk to the other, which
<pb n="107"/><anchor id="Pg107"/>
beside all other reasons make us to pray to God, and to desire
you, and all that love the honour of Christ, and the peace
of these Kirks and Kingdomes, heartily to endeavour,
that there might be in both Kirks, one Confession, one
Directory for publicke worship, one Catechisme, and one
Forme of Kirk-government. And if the Lord who hath
done great things for us, shall be pleased to hearken unto our
desires, and to accept of our endeavours, we shall not only
have a sure foundation for a durable Peace, but shall be
strong in God, against the rising or spreading of Heresie
and Schisme amongst our selves, and of invasion from forraine
enemies.
</p>

<p>
Concerning the different Formes of Kirk-government,
projected by sundrie sorts of men, to be set up in place of
Episcopall Hierarchie, which we trust is brought near unto
its period, we must confesse, that we are not a little grieved
that any godly Ministers and Brethren should be found, who
doe not agree with other Reformed Kirks in the point of government
as well as in the matter of Doctrine and worship;
and that we want not our own feares, that where the hedge
of Discipline and Government is different, the Doctrine and
Worship shall not long continue the same without change:
yet doe not marvell much, that particular Kirks and Congregations
which live in such places, as that they can conveniently
have no dependencie upon superiour Assemblies,
should stand for a kind of independencie and supremacie in
themselves, they not considering that in a nation or Kingdome,
professing the same Religion, the government of the
Kirk by compound Presbyteries and Synods is a help and
strength, and not a hinderance or prejudice to particular
Congregations and Elderships, in all the parts of Kirk-government;
and that Presbyteries and Synods are not an extrinsecall
power set over particular Kirks, like unto Episcopal
dominion, they being no more to be reputed extrinsecal
unto the particular Kirks, nor the power of a Parliament,
or Convention of Estates, where the Shires and Cities have
their own Delegates, is to be held extrinsecal to any particular
Shire or City.
</p>

<pb n="108"/><anchor id="Pg108"/>

<p>
Our unanimous judgement and uniforme practice, is,
that according to the order of the Reformed Kirks, and
the ordinance of God in his Word, not onely the solemne
execution of Ecclesiastical power and authoritie, but the
whole acts and exercise thereof, do properly belong unto
the Officers of the Kirk; yet so that in matters of chiefest
importance, the tacite consent of the Congregation be had,
before their decrees and sentences receive final execution,
and that the Officers of a particular Congregation, may not
exercise this power independently, but with subordination
unto greater Presbyteries and Synods, Provincial and National:
Which as they are representative of the particular
Kirks conjoyned together in one under their government;
so their determination, when they proceed orderly, whether
in causes common to all, or many of the Kirks, or in
causes brought before them by appellations or references
from the inferiour, in the case of aberation of the inferiour,
is to the several Congregations authoritative and obligatorie
and not consultatory only: And this dependencie and subordination,
we conceive not only to be warranted by the
light of nature, which doth direct the Kirk in such things
as are common to other societies, or to be a prudential way
for Reformation, and for the preservation of Truth and
Peace, against Schisme, Heresie, and Tyranny, which is
the sweet fruits of this government wheresoever hath
place, and which we have found in ancient and late experience;
but also to be grounded upon the Word of God,
and to be conforme to the paterne of the Primitive and Apostolical
Kirks: And without which, neither could the
Kirks in this Kingdome have been reformed, nor were we
able for any time to preserve Truth and Unity amongst us.
</p>

<p>
In this forme of Kirk-government, our unanimity and
harmony by the mercy of God, is so full and perfect, that
all the Members of this Assembly have declared themselves
to be of one heart, and of one soule, and to be no lesse
perswaded, that it is of God, then that Episcopal government
is of men; resolving by the grace of God, to hold
the same constantly all the dayes of our life, and heartily
wishing that God would blesse all the Christians Kirks, especially
<pb n="109"/><anchor id="Pg109"/>
the famous Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, unto which in all other
respects we are so nearly joyned with this divine Forme of
government. Thus having briefly and plainly given our
judgement for your satisfaction, and desiring and hoping
that ye will beleeve against all mis-reports, that we know not
so much as one man, more or lesse eminent amongst us, of a
different judgement, we commend you unto the riches of
the grace of Christ, who will perfect that which he had begun
amongst you, to your unspeakable comfort.
Subscribed by our Moderator and Clerk.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh 9. August, 1641.</hi>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>The Assemblies Answer to the Kings
Majesties Letter.</hi></head>

<p>
Most gracious Soveraign,
</p>

<p>
Beside the conscience of that duetie which we owe to supreme
Authority, we are not only encouraged, but
confirmed by the Royal favour and Princely munificence,
expressed in Your gracious Majesties Letters, which filled
our hearts with joy, and our mouths with praise, to offer
up our prayers with the greater fervencie to God Almightie
for your Majesties happinesse, our selves for our own parts,
and for the whole Kirks of this your Majesties Kingdome,
which we doe represent, to serve Your Majestie in all
humble obedience, our faithful labours for preserving
Trueth and Peace amongst all Your Majesties Subjects, and
our example (according to Your Majesties just commandments
laid upon us) to be a presedent to others in paying
that honour, which by all Lawes divine and humane, is due
unto Your sacred Majestie, being confident that your Majestie
shall finde at your coming hither much more satisfaction
and content then can be expressed by
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Your Majesties most humble Subjects and faithful
Servants, the Ministers and Elders met together
in the vonerable Assembly at</hi> St. Andrews,
<hi rend='italic'>July 20, and</hi> Edinburgh, <hi rend='italic'>July 27. 1641.</hi>
</p>

</div>

<pb n="110"/><anchor id="Pg110"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act anent the Kirk of</hi> Campheir.</head>

<p>
The which day a motion was made in the Assembly, that
it seemed expedient for correspondencie that might be
had from forraigne parts, for the weal of this Kirk, That
the Scots Kirk at <hi rend='italic'>Campheir</hi>
were joyned to the Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Scotland</hi>,
as a Member thereof: Which being seriously
thought upon and considered by the Assembly, they approved
the motion, and ordained Master <hi rend='italic'>Robert Baillie</hi> Minister
at <hi rend='italic'>Cilwinning</hi>, to write to
Master <hi rend='italic'>William Spang</hi> Minister
at <hi rend='italic'>Campheir</hi>, and Kirk-Session thereof, willing them to
send their Minister, and a ruling Elder, instructed with a
Commission to the next General Assembly to be holden at St
<hi rend='italic'>Andrews</hi>, the last Wednesday of
<hi rend='italic'>July 1642.</hi> at which time
they should be inrolled in the Books of the General Assembly,
as the Commissioners of the General Assembly of <hi rend='italic'>Scotland</hi>,
from the Scots Kirk at <hi rend='italic'>Campheir</hi>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Assembly appoints the next General Assembly to
be holden at</hi> St. Andrews, <hi rend='italic'>the last Wednesday of</hi>
July <hi rend='italic'>next</hi>, 1642.
</p>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<pb n="111"/><anchor id="Pg111"/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>The Generall Assembly, Conveened at S. Andrews, July 27. 1642.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Act Sess. 1. July 27. 1642.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>The Kings Letter to the Generall Assembly, presented
by His Majesties Commissioner, the Earle of</hi>
Dumfermling, <hi rend='italic'>July 27. 1642.</hi></head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Charles R.</hi>
</p>

<p>
In the midst of Our great and weighty affaires of
Our other kingdoms, which God Almighty, who
is privie to Our Intentions, and in whom We
trust, will in his own time bring to a wished and
peaceable conclusion, We are not unmindfull of
that duetie which we owe to that Our ancient and native Kingdome,
and to the Kirks there, now met together by their
Commissioners in a Nationall Assembly. God whose Vice-gerent
We are, hath made Us a King over divers Kingdomes,
and We have no other desire, nor designe, but to
govern them by their own Lawes, and the Kirks in them by
their own Canons and Constitutions. Where any thing is
found to be amisse, We will endeavour a Reformation in a
fair and orderly way; and where a Reformation is settled,
We resolve, with that authoritie where with God hath in vested
Us, to maintain and defend it in peace and libertie, against
<pb n="112"/><anchor id="Pg112"/>
all trouble that can come from without, and against all Heresies,
Sects, and Schismes which may arise from within.
Nor do We desire any thing more in that Kingdom (and
when We shall hear of it, it shall be a delight and matter of
gladnesse unto Us) then that the Gospel be faithfully preached
throughout the whole Kingdom, to the outmost skirts
and borders thereof. Knowing that to be the mean of honour
to God, of happinesse to the people, and of true obedience
to Us. And for this effect, that holy and able men
be put in places of the Ministery, and that Schooles and Colledges
may flourish in Learning and true Pietie. Some
things for advancing of those ends, We did of Our own accord
promise in Our Letters to the last Assembly, and
We make your selves Judges, who were witnesses to
Our Actions, while We were there in Person, whether
we did not perform them both in the point of presentations
which are in our hands, and in the liberall provision of
all the Universities and Colledges of the Kingdome, not
only above that which any of Our Progenitors had done
before Us, but also above your owne hopes and expectation.
We doe not make commemoration of this Our Beneficence,
either to please Ourselves, or to stop the influence
of Our Royal goodnesse and Bountie for afterward, but that
by these reall demonstrations of Our unfained desires and delight
to do good, you may be the more confident to expect
from Us, whatsoever in Justice We can grant, or what may
be expedient for you to obtaine. We have given expresse
charge to Our Commissioner, to see that all things be done
there orderly and peaceably, as if We were present in Our
Own Person; not doubting but in thankfulnesse for your
present estate and condition, you will abstaine from every
thing that may make any new disturbance, and that you will
be more wise then to be the enemies of your own peace,
which would but stumble others, and ruine your selves.
We have also commanded Our Commissioner to receive
from you your just and reasonable desires, for what may
further serve for the good of Religion, that taking them to
Our consideration, We may omit nothing which may witnesse
<pb n="113"/><anchor id="Pg113"/>
Us to be indeed a nursing Father of that Kirk, wherein
We were born and baptized, and that if ye be not happy,
you may blame not Us, but your selves. And now
what doe We again require of you, but that which otherwise
you owe to Us as your Soveraigne Lord and King, even
that ye pray for Our prosperitie and the peace of Our Kingdomes,
that ye use the best meanes to keep Our People in
obedience to Us and Our Lawes, which doth very much
in Our personall absence from that Our Kingdom depend
upon your preaching, and your owne exemplary loyaltie
and faithfulnesse, and that against all such jealousies, suspitions,
and sinister rumors as are too frequent in these times,
and have been often falsified in time past, by the reality
of the contrary events: Ye judge Us and Our professions
by Our actions, which we trust through God in despight of
malice shall ever go on in a constant way for the good of
Religion, and the weal of Our People, which is the
Chiefest of Our intentions and desires. And thus We bid
you farewell. <hi rend='italic'>Given at Our Court at</hi> Leicester,
<hi rend='italic'>the 23. of</hi>
July, 1642.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>To Our trusty and wel beloved the Generall
Assembly in our Kingdom of</hi> Scotland
<hi rend='italic'>conveened at</hi> S. Andrews.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Act Sess 3. July 29. 1642.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act for bringing in of the Synode Books yeerly
to the General Assemblies.</hi></head>

<p>
The Moderator calling to minde that which was forgotten
in the preceeding Sessions, the examination of the
Provincial Books, caused call the Roll of the Provinciall
Assemblies, And the Assembly finding very few Provinces
to have sent their Books to this Assembly, notwithstanding
of the ordinance of the former Assembly thereanent, for
the more exact obedience of that ordinance hereafter,
<pb n="114"/><anchor id="Pg114"/>
the Assembly in one voyce ordaines, That the Books of every
Provincial Assembly shall be brought and produced to
every General Assembly: And that this may be performed,
ordaines that every Clerk of the Provincials, either bring
or send the said Books yearly to the General Assemblies, by
the Commissioners sent to the Assemblies, from these Presbyteries
where the Clerks reside. Which charge the Assembly
also layes upon the said Commissioners, sent from the
saids Presbyteries where the Clerks reside, may and while
some meanes be provided, whereby the Clerks charges may
be sustained for coming with the saids Books themselves:
And that under the pain of deprivation of the Clerk, in
case of his neglect, and of such censure of the saids Commissioners,
in case of their neglect as the Assembly shall
think convenient.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Act Sess 5. August 1. 1642.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act anent the choosing of Kirk Sessions.</hi></head>

<p>
Anent the question moved to the Assembly, concerning
the election of Kirk Sessions, The Assembly ordaines
the old Session to elect the new Session both in Burgh and
Land. And that if any place shall vaik in the Session chosen,
by death or otherwise, the present Session shall have
the election of the person to fill the vacand roome.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Sess 6. August 2. 1642.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>The Report of the Interpretation of the Act at</hi>
Edinburgh, <hi rend='italic'>anent tryal of Ministers.</hi></head>

<p>
The meaning of the foresaid Act, is not that an actual
Minister to be transported, shall be tried again by the
tryals appointed for trying of Expectants, at their entry to
the Ministery, according to the Acts of the Kirk; but only
<pb n="115"/><anchor id="Pg115"/>
that he bringing a Testimonial of his former tryals, and
of his abilities, and conversation, from the Presbyterie
from whence he comes, and giving such satisfaction to the
Parochiners Presbyterie whereto he comes in preaching, as
the Presbyterie finds his gifts fit and answerable for the
condition and disposition of the Congregation, whereto
he is presented. Because, according to the Act of the Assembly
1596. renewed at <hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi>, some that are meet for
the Ministery in some places, are not meet for all alike:
And Universities, Towns and Burghs, and places of Noblemens
residence, or frequencie of Papists, and other
great and eminent Congregations, and in sundry other cases,
require men of greater abilities, nor will be required
necessarily in the planting of all private small Paroches, the
leaving of the consideration of these cases unto the judgement
and consideration of the Presbyterie, was the only
intention of the Act.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Assembly approves the meaning and interpretation foresaid:
And appoints the said Act, according to this interpretation,
to stand in force, and to have the strength of an Act
and ordinance of Assembly in all time coming.</hi>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Act Sess. 7. August 3. 1642.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act anent the order for making Lists to His Majestie,
and other Patrons for Presentations; The
order of tryal of Expectants, and for
trying the quality of Kirks.</hi></head>

<p>
Forsameikle as His Majestie was graciously pleased in His
Answer to the Petition, tendred by the Commissioners
of the late Assembly to His Majestie, to declare and promise,
for the better providing of vaiking Kirks at His Majesties
Presentation with qualified Ministers, to present one
out of a list of six persons, sent to His Majestie from the
Presbyteries wherein the vaiking Kirk lyeth, as His Majesties
Declaration, signed with his Royal hand at <hi rend='italic'>White-hall</hi>,
<pb n="116"/><anchor id="Pg116"/>
the 3. of <hi rend='italic'>January</hi> last, registrate in the books of Assembly,
this day at length beares. And suchlike whereas the Lords
of Exchequer upon a Petition presented to them by the
Commissioners of the Generall Assembly, and the Procurator
and Agent for the Kirk representing two Prejudices;
one, that gifts obtained from His Majestie of Patronages of
Kirks, at His Presentation were passing the Exchequer,
without the qualification and provision of a List, wherewith
His Majestie was pleased to restrict himself; and the other,
that some were seeking gifts of patronage of Bishop-Kirks,
which we declared to belong to Presbyteries, to be planted
by two Acts of the late Parliament, The saids Lords have
ordained that no signatory containing gifts of patronages
from His Majestie, shall passe hereafter, but with a speciall
provision that the same shall be lyable to the tenor of His Majesties
said Declaration. Ordaining also the Procurator &amp; Agent
of the Kirk to be advertised, &amp; to have place to see all signaters
whatsoever, containing any patronage, to the effect
they may represent the interest of the Kirk therein; as the said
Act of the date the 27 of <hi rend='italic'>June</hi> last, registrate also in the Books
of Assembly, this day at length beares. Therefore that the saids
Kirks which now are, or which were at his Majesties presentation
the sayd third day of <hi rend='italic'>January</hi> last, may be the better
provided with able Ministers, when the samine shall vaik,
The Assembly ordaines that hereafter every Presbyterie
shall give up yearly a Roll of the ablest of their Expectants,
to their Synods; and that the Synods select out of these Rolls
such persons whom they in certain knowledge judge most fit
for the Ministrie and worthiest of the first place, With Power
to the Synods to adde or alter these Rolls given by the
Presbyteries, as they thinke reasonable: And that the Synods
shall send the Rolls made by them in this manner, to the next
Generall Assembly, who shall also examine the Rolls of the
Synods, and adde or alter the same as shall be thought expedient.
Which Roll made by the Generall Assembly, shall be
sent to every Presbyterie &amp; that the Presbyterie, with consent
of the most or best part of the Congregation, shall make a
List of six persons willing to accept of the presentation out of
that Roll of the Assembly, upon every occasion of vacation of
<pb n="117"/><anchor id="Pg117"/>
any Kirk within their bounds, and shall send the samine together
with a blank presentation: The which (if His Majesty
be Patron to the vacant Kirk) shall be sent by the said Procurator
and Agent, to such as the Commissioners of the Generall
Assembly, or in their absence the Presbyterie of <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>:
shall direct and think at that time most able and willing
to obtain the presentation, to be signed and filled up by His
Maj. choise of one of the List. And if the vacant Kirk be of a
Patronage disponed by His Majesty since the 3. of <hi rend='italic'>January</hi>,
in that case either the Presbyteries themselves shall send a
List of six persons in maner aforesaid, with a blank presentation
to the Patron, to be filled up by his choise, &amp; subscribed
or send the samine to the saids Officers of the Kirk, to be conveyed
by them to the Patron of the vaiking Kirk, as the Presbyterie
shall think most expedient. It is always declared,
that this order shall be without prejudice to the Presbyteries,
with consent foresaid, to put actual Ministers upon the said
List of six persons, to be sent to the Patron of the said vaiking
Kirks, if they please. And least that the nomination of Expectants
by Presbyteries, Synods, or Assemblies, in their Rolls
or Lists foresaid, be mis-interpreted, as though the Expectants
nominated in these Rolls and Lists, were thereby holden &amp;
acknowledged to be qualified, which is not the intention of
the Assembly, who rather think, that in respect of this Order,
there should be a more exact tryal of Expectants then before:
Therefore the Assembly ordaines, that no Expectants shall be
put on the Rolls or Lists above-mentioned, but such as have
been upon the publike exercise, at the least by the space of half
a year, or longer, as the Presbyterie shall finde necessary. And
suchlike ordaines, that hereafter none be admitted to the publike
exercise, before they be tried according to the tryal appointed
for Expectants, at their entrie to the Ministerie in the
late Assembly at <hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi>, in the 24. Article of the Act of the 23.
Session thereof: which tryall of the Assembly appoints to be
taken of every Expectant, before his admission to the publike
exercise. And suchlike ordaines, That the samine tryall
shall be again taken immediatly before their admission to the
Ministerie, together with their triall mentioned in the advice
of some Brethren deputed for penning the corruptions of
<pb n="118"/><anchor id="Pg118"/>
the Ministery, approven in the said Act of the Generall Assembly
at <hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi>. And because that Kirks of the patronages
foresaids, will vaik before the Rolls and Lists be made
up by the Presbyteries, Synods, and General Assemblies,
in manner foresaid: Therefore in the <hi rend='italic'>interim</hi> the Assembly
ordains the Commissioners of every Presbyterie here present,
to give in a List of the ablest Expectants within their bounds,
the morn, to the Clerk of the Assembly, that the Assembly
may out of these Rolls, make a List to be sent to every
Presbyterie: Out of which the Presbyteries shall make a List
of six persons, with consent foresaid, and send the samine upon
vacancie of any Church within their bounds, together with a
presentation to His Majestie, or any other patron, in manner
foresaid. And because the Procurator and Agent of the
Kirk cannot get sufficient information to the Lords of Exchequer
anent the Right and Interest of the Kirk, and Presbyteries
in Kirks, whereof gifts of patronages may be presented
to the Exchequer: Therefore the Assembly ordaines for their
better information hereanent, that every Presbyterie, with
all diligence, use all meanes of exact tryall of the nature and
qualitie of all Kirks within their bounds, as what Kirks belong
to the Kings Majesties patronage, what to other Laick patronages,
what Kirks of old were planted by the Presbyteries,
and what by Prelates, and Bishops, before the Assembly
at <hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi> 1638. what hath been the way and time of
the change of the planting and providing of the Kirks, if any
have been changed or any other thing concerning the nature
and qualitie of every Kirk within their bounds, and to send
the same to the Procurator of the Kirk with all diligence.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act anent Lists for the Kirks in the
High-lands.</hi></head>

<p>
The Assembly considering that in <hi rend='italic'>Argyle</hi>, and in other places
of the <hi rend='italic'>Irish</hi> language, there will not be gotten six expectants
able to speak that language, And therfore the Assembly
is hopefull, that in these singular cases, His Majestie
will be pleased for Kirks vacand in the <hi rend='italic'>Highlands</hi>, to accept
<pb n="119"/><anchor id="Pg119"/>
of a List of so many expectants as can be had, able to speak
the <hi rend='italic'>Irish</hi> language. And the Commissioners Grace promiseth
to recommend it to His Majestie.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Overtures against Papists, non-Communicants,
and profaners of the Sabbath.</hi></head>

<p>
The Assembly would draw up a Supplication to be presented
by the Commissioners of the Presbyterie of <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>
to the Councell at their first meeting, for the due execution
of the Acts of Parliament and Councell against Papists, wherein
it will be specially craved, that the Exchequer should
be the Intromettors with the Rents of these who are excommunicate,
and that from the Exchequer the Presbyterie may
receive that portion of the confiscate goods, which the Law
appoints to be imployed <hi rend='italic'>ad pios usus</hi>.
</p>

<p>
II. Every Presbyterie would conveen at their first meeting,
all known Papists in their bounds, and require them
to put out of their company, all friends and servants who
are Popish within one moneth: Also within that same
space, to give their children, sons and daughters, who are
above seven yeers old, to be educate at their charges, by
such of their Protestant friends, as the Presbyterie shall approve,
and finde sufficient caution for bringing home within
three moneths such of their children who are without
the Kingdom, to be educate in Schooles and Colledges at
the Presbyteries sight; to finde caution likewise of their
abstinence from Masse, and the company of all Jesuits and
Priests.
</p>

<p>
III. That all, of whatsoever rank or degree, who refuse
to give satisfaction in every one of the foresaid Articles,
shall be processed without any delay; but those who give
satisfaction shall be dealt with in all meeknesse, after this
manner: The Presbyteries shall appoint such of their number
as they shall find fittest to confer with them so frequently
as the Brethren are able to attend, until the midst of <hi rend='italic'>October</hi>
next, against which time, if they be not willing to go to
Church, they shall give assurance to go and dwell in the
<pb n="120"/><anchor id="Pg120"/>
next adjacent University Town, whether <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>St. Andrews</hi>, or
<hi rend='italic'>Aberdene</hi>, from <hi rend='italic'>November 1.</hi> to the
last of <hi rend='italic'>March</hi>, where they shall attend all the diets of conference
which the Professor and Ministers of the bounds shall
appoint to them: By which, if they be not converted, their
obstinacy shall be declared in the Provincial Synods of <hi rend='italic'>April</hi>,
and from thence their Processe shall go on to the very closure
without any farther delay.
</p>

<p>
IV. That every Presbyterie, as they will be answerable
to the next General Assembly, be careful to do their dutie
in all the premisses.
</p>

<p>
V. That there be given presently by the Members of this
present Assembly unto the Commissioners of the Presbyterie
of <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, a List of all excommunicate Papists
they know, and of all Papists who have children educate
abroad, that they may be presented, together with our Supplication
to the Councel, at their first sitting.
</p>

<p>
VI. That the Councel may be supplicate for an Act, that
in no Regiment which goes out of the Kingdom, any Papists
bear office, and that the Colonel be required to finde caution
for this effect, before he receive the Councels warrant for
levying any Souldiers: Also that he finde caution for the
maintaining of a Minister, and keeping of a Session in his Regiment.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Item</hi>, The Assembly would enjoyn every Presbyterie to
proceed against Non-communicants, whether Papists or
others, according to the Act of Parliament made thereanent.
And suchlike, that Acts of Parliament against prophaners
of the Sabbath be put to execution.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>The Assembly approves the Overtures foresaid, and ordains
Presbyteries to put the samine to execution with all diligence:
And that the Commissioners of every Presbyterie give in a
List of the excommunicate Papists within their bounds, and
of Papists children out of the countrey to the Clerk, that the
same may be presented to the Councel by the Commissioners of
this Assembly.</hi>
</quote>

</div>

<pb n="121"/><anchor id="Pg121"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act anent the joyning of the Presbyterie of</hi>
Sky <hi rend='italic'>to the Synode of</hi> Argyle.</head>

<p>
The General Assembly having considered the whole proceedings
of the Commissioners of the late General Assembly
holden at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, anent the reference made to
them concerning the Presbyterie of <hi rend='italic'>Sky</hi>, together with the
whole reasons <hi rend='italic'>pro &amp; contra</hi> in the said matter, after mature
deliberation have ratified and approved, and by these presents
ratifie and approve the Sentence of the saids Commissioners
thereintil. And further ordains the said Presbytery
of <hi rend='italic'>Sky</hi>, and all the Ministers and Elders thereof, to keep the
meetings of the Provincial Assembly of <hi rend='italic'>Argyle</hi>, where they
shall happen to be appointed in all time coming, suchlike as
any other Presbyterie within the bounds of the said Province
of <hi rend='italic'>Argyle</hi> uses to do: And that the samine Presbyterie
be in all time hereafter within the Jurisdiction of the said
Provincial Assembly, without any further question to be
made thereanent.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Sess. 8. August 3. post Meridiem.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>The Supplication of this Assembly to the
KINGS MAJESTIE.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>To the Kings most Excellent Maj. the hearty
Thanksgiving, and humble Petition of the General
Assembly of the Kirk of</hi> Scotland, <hi rend='italic'>met at</hi>
St. Andrews, <hi rend='italic'>July 27. 1642.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Our hearts were filled with great joy and gladnesse at the
hearing of Your Majesties Letter, which was read
once and again in face of the Assembly, every line thereof
almost either expressing such affection to the Reformed Religion,
and such Royal care of us, as we could require
<pb n="122"/><anchor id="Pg122"/>
from a Christian Prince; or requiring such necessary duties
from us, as we are bound to performe as Ministers of the
Gospel, and Christian Subjects: For which, as solemne
thanks were given by the Moderator of the Assembly, so
do we all with one voice in all humility, present unto
Your Majestie the thankfulnesse of our hearts, with our earnest
prayers to God for your Majesties prosperity, and the
peace of Your Kingdoms, that Your Majestie may be indeed
a nursing Father to all the Kirks of Christ in Your Maj. Dominions;
&amp; especially to the Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Scotland</hi> honoured with
Your Birth and Baptisme: Promising our most serious indeavours
by doctrine and life, to advance the Gospel of Christ, &amp;
and to keep the people in our charge in Unity and Peace,
and in all loyalty and obedience to Your Majestie and Your
Laws. Your Majesties commands to Your Commissioner,
the Earle of <hi rend='italic'>Dumfermling</hi>, to receive from us our just and
reasonable desires for what may further serve for the good of
Religion here, the favours which we have received already,
and Your Maj. desires and delight to do good, expressed in
Your Letter, are as many encouragements to us, to take the boldnesse
in all humility to present unto Your Majestie (beside
the particulars recommended to Your Majesties Commissioner)
one thing, which for the present is the chiefest of all
Our desires, as serving most for the glory of Christ, for Your
Majesties Honour and Comfort; and not onely for the good
of Religion here, but for the true happinesse and peace of
all Your Majesties Dominions; which is no new motion,
but the prosecution of that same by the Commissioners of
this Your Majesties Kingdom in the late Treatie, and which
Your Majestie, with advice of both houses of Parliament,
did approve in these words: <hi rend='italic'>To their desire concerning unitie in
Religion and uniformitie of Church government, as a speciall meanes
of conserving of Peace betwixt the two Kingdoms, upon the grounds
and reasons contained in the Paper of the 10 of</hi> March, <hi rend='italic'>given in to
the Treaty and Parliament of</hi> England: It is answered upon the
15 of <hi rend='italic'>June, That his Majestie, with
advice of both Houses of Parliament,
doth approve of the affection of His Subjects of</hi> Scotland, <hi rend='italic'>in
their desire of having the conformity of Church-government, betwixt
the two Nations, and as the Parliament hath already taken into consideration
<pb n="123"/><anchor id="Pg123"/>
the reformation of Church government, so they will proceed
therein in due time, as shall best conduce to the glory of God, the
Peace of the Church, and of both Kingdoms, 11 of</hi> June 1641.
In Our answer to a Declaration sent by the now Commissioners
of this Kingdom from both Houses of Parliament, we
have not onely pressed this point of unity in Religion and
Uniformity of Church government, as a meane of a firme
and durable union betwixt the two Kingdomes, and without
which former experiences put us out of hope long to enjoy
the puritie of the Gospel with Peace, but also have rendred
the reasons of our hopes and confidence, as from other
considerations, so from Your Majesties late Letter to this
Assembly, that Your Majestie in a happy conjunction with
the Houses of Parliament, will be pleased to settle this blessed
Reformation, with so earnestly desired a Peace in all
Your Dominions. And therfore we Your Majesties most loving Subjects,
in name of the whole Kirks of <hi rend='italic'>Scotland</hi>, represented
by us, upon the knees of our hearts, do most
humbly and earnestly beg, that Your Majesty in the deep of
Your Royall Wisdom, and from Your affection to the true
Religion, and the Peace of Your Kingdoms, may be moved
to consider, that the God of Heaven and Earth is calling
for this Reformation at Your hands, and that as you are his
Vice-gerent, so You may be his prime Instrument in it. If it
shall please the Lord (which is our desire and hope) that
this blessed unitie in Religion and Uniformity in Government
shall be brought about; Your Majesties Conscience, in
performing of so great a dutie: shall be a well-spring of comfort
to Your Self, Your memory shall be a sweet favour, and
Your name renowned to all following generations. And if
these unhappy commotions and divisions shall end in this
peace and unity; then it shall appeare in the Providence of
God, they were but the noyse of many waters, and the voyce
of a great thunder before the voyce of harpers harping with
their harps, which shall fill this whole Iland with melodie
and mirth, and the name of it shall be, THE LORD
IS THERE.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="124"/><anchor id="Pg124"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>The Declaration of the Parliament of</hi> England,
<hi rend='italic'>sent to the Assembly.</hi></head>

<p>
The Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled,
finding to their great grief, that the distractions
of this Kingdome dayly increase, and that the wicked
Counsels and practises of a malignent party amongst us (if
God prevent them not) are like to cast this nation into bloud
and confusion, To testifie to all the World how earnestly
they desire to avoid a Civill Warre, they have addressed
themselves in an humble Supplication to His Majestie, for
the prevention thereof. A Copy of which their petition,
they have thought fit to send at this time to the National Assembly
of the Church of <hi rend='italic'>Scotland</hi>, to the intent that that
Church and Kingdome (whereunto they are united by so
many and so near bounds and tyes, as well Spiritual as Civil)
may see that the like minde is now in them, that formerly
appeared to be in that Nation. And that they are as tender
of the effusion of Christian bloud on the one side, as they are
zealous on the other side of a due Reformation both in
Church and State. In which work, whilest they were labouring,
they have been interrupted by the plots and practises
of a malignant party of Papists, and ill affected persons,
especially of the corrupt and dissolute Clergy, by
the incitement and instigation of Bishops and others,
whose avarice and ambition being not able to bear the Reformation
endeavoured by the Parliament, they have laboured
(as we can expect little better fruit from such
trees) to kindle a flame, and raise a combustion within
the bowels of this Kingdom: Which if by our humble
supplication to His Majesty it may be prevented, and
that according to our earnest desire therein, all Force and
Warlike preparations being laid aside, we may returne to a
peaceable parliamentary proceeding, We do not doubt,
but that by the blessing of Almighty God upon our endeavours,
we shall settle the matters both in Church and State,
to the encrease of His Majesties honour and State, the peace
and prosperitie of this Kingdome, and especially to the
<pb n="125"/><anchor id="Pg125"/>
glory of God, by the advancement of the true Religion,
and such a Reformation of the Church, as shall be most agreeable
to Gods Word. Out of all which, there will also most
undoubtedly result a most firme &amp; stable Union between the
two Kingdomes of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Scotland</hi>, which according
to our Protestation, we shall by all good wayes and meanes,
upon all occasions, labour to preserve and maintain.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Subscribitur</hi><lb/>
John Brown, <hi rend='italic'>Cler. Parl.</hi>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>The Assemblies answer to the Declaration of
the Parliament of</hi> England.</head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly of the Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Scotland</hi> having received
a Declaration sent unto them by the Commissioners
of this Kingdome, now at <hi rend='italic'>London</hi>, from the Honourable
Houses of the Parliament of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi> expressing their
care to prevent the effusion of Christian bloud in that Kingdome,
and their affections to Reformation both in Kirk and
State, and having taken the same to such consideration as the
importance of so weighty matters, and the high estimation
they have of so wise and honourable a meeting as is the Parliament
of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, did require; have with universall consent
resolved upon this following Answer.
</p>

<p>
I. That from the recent sense of the goodnesse of God,
in their own late deliverance, and from their earnest desire
of all happinesse to our native King and that Kingdome, they
blesse the Lord for preserving them in the midst of so many
unhappy divisions and troubles from a bloudy Intestine War,
which is from God the greatest Judgement, and to such a
nation the compend of all calamities. They also give God
thanks for their former and present desires of a Reformation,
especially of Religion, which is the glory and strength of a
Kingdome, and bringeth with it all temporall blessings of
prosperity and peace.
</p>

<p>
II. That the hearts of all the Members of this Assembly,
and of all the wel-affected within this Kingdome, are exceedingly
<pb n="126"/><anchor id="Pg126"/>
grieved and made heavy, that in so long a time,
against the professions both of King and Parliament, and
contrary to the joynt desires and prayers of the godly in both
Kingdomes, to whom it is more deare and precious then
what is dearest to them in the world, the Reformation of
Religion hath moved so slowly, and suffered so great interruption.
They consider that not only Prelates, formall
Professours, profane and worldly men, and all that are Popishly
affected, are bad councellours and workers, and do
abuse their power, and bend all their strength and policies
against the Work of God; but the God of this world also,
with Principalities and powers, the rulers of the darknesse
of this world, and spiritual wickednesse in high places, are
working with all their force and fraud in the same opposition,
not without hope of successe, they having prevailed so
farre from the beginning, That in the times of the best
Kings of <hi rend='italic'>Juda</hi> of old, and the most part of the Reformed
Kirks of late, a through and perfect Reformation of Religion
hath been a work full of difficulties, Yet doe they
conceive, that as it ought first of all to be intended so
should it be above all other things, with confidence in God,
who is greater then the World, and he who is in the World,
most seriously endeavoured. And that when the supream providence
giveth opportunity of the accepted time &amp; day of salvation,
no other work can prosper in the hands of his servants,
if it be not apprehended, &amp; with all reverence &amp; faithfulnesse
improved. This Kirk and Nation, when the Lord gave them
the calling, considered not their own deadnesse, nor staggered
at the promise through unbelief, but gave glory to God.
And who knoweth (we speak it in humility and love, and
from no other mind then from a desire of the blessing of God
upon our King and that Kingdome) but the Lord hath now
some controversie with <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, which will not be removed,
till first and before all, the worship of his name and the government
of his house be settled according to his own will?
When this desire shall come, it shall be to <hi rend='italic'>England</hi> after so
long deferred hopes, a tree of life, which shall not only
yeeld temporell blessings unto themselves, but also shall
spread the branches so far, that both this nation and other reformed
<pb n="127"/><anchor id="Pg127"/>
Kirks shall finde the fruits thereof to their great satisfaction.
</p>

<p>
III. The Commissioners of this Kingdome in the late
Treaty of peace, considering that Religion is not only the
meane of the service of God and saving of Souls, but is also
the base and foundation of Kingdomes and Estates, and the
strongest band to tye Subjects to their Prince in true loyaltie,
and to knit the hearts of one to another in true unity and
love, They did with preface of all due respect and reverence,
far from arrogancy or presumption, represent in
name of this Kingdome, their serious thoughts and earnest
desires for unity of Religion, That in all His Majesties Dominions,
there might be one Confession of Faith, one directory
of worship, one publike Catechisme, and one form of
Kirk Government. This they conceived to be acceptable to
God Almighty, who delighteth to see his People walking
in truth and unity, to be a speciall meanes for conserving of
peace betwixt the Kingdomes, of easing the Kings Majesty,
and the publike government of much trouble, which ariseth
from differences of Religion, very grievous to Kings
and Estates, of great content to the King himself, to his
Nobles, his Court, and all his people, when (occasioned
to be abroad) without scruple to themselves, or scandal to
others; all may resort to the same publike worship, as if
they were at their own dwellings; of suppressing the names
of Heresies, and Sects, Puritans, Conformists, Separatists,
Anabaptists, &amp;c. Which do rent asunder the bowels
both of Kirk and Kingdome, of despaire of successe to Papists
and Recusants, to have their profession, which is inconsistent
with the true Protestant Religion, and authority
of Princes, setup again, and of drawing the hearts and
hands of Ministers, from unpleasant and unprofitable Controversies,
to the pressing of mortification, and to Treatises
of true pietie, and practical Divinity. The Assembly doth
now enter upon the labour of the Commissioners, unto
which they are encouraged, not only by their faithfulnesse
in the late Treaty, but also by the zeale and example of the
Generall Assemblies of this Kirk in former times, as may
appeare by the Assembly at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Decemb. 25.</hi> in the
<pb n="128"/><anchor id="Pg128"/>
year 1566. which ordained a Letter to be sent to <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>
against the Surplice, Tippet, Cornercap, and such other
Ceremonies as then troubled that Kirk, that they might be
removed. By the Assembly at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>April 24. 1583.</hi>
humbly desiring the Kings Majesty to command his Ambassadour,
then going to <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, to deale with the Queen,
that there might be an Union and Band betwixt them &amp; other
Christian Princes &amp; Realmes, professing the true Religion for
defence and protection of the Word of God, and Professors
thereof, against the persecution of Papists and confederates
joyned and united together by the bloudy league of <hi rend='italic'>Trent</hi>: as
also that his Majesty would disburden their brethren of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>
of the yoke of Ceremonies, imposed upon them, against
the liberty of the Word: And by the Assembly at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>March 3. 1589.</hi> ordaining the
Presbyterie of <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi> to
use all good and possible means for the relief and comfort
of the Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, then heavily troubled for the maintaining
the true discipline and government of the Kirk, and
that the Brethren in their private and publike prayers, recommend
the estate of the afflicted Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi> to God,
While now by the mercy of God the conjunction of the two
Kingdomes is many wayes increased, the zeale of the Generall
Assembly towards their happinesse ought to be no lesse.
But besides these, the Assembly is much encouraged unto
this duetie, both from the Kings Majesty and his Parliament,
joyntly, in their Answer to the proposition, made by the late
Commissioners of the Treaty, in these words: <hi rend='italic'>To their desire
concerning unity of Religion, and uniformity of Kirk government as
a speciall meanes for conserving of peace betwixt the two Kingdomes,
upon the grounds and reasons contained in the paper of the</hi>
10 <hi rend='italic'>of</hi>
March, <hi rend='italic'>and given in to the treatie and Parliament of</hi> England:
<hi rend='italic'>It is answered upon the</hi> 15.
<hi rend='italic'>of</hi> June, <hi rend='italic'>That his Majestie with advise,
of both Houses of Parliament doth approve of the affection of His Subjects
of</hi> Scotland <hi rend='italic'>in their desire of having conformitie of Kirk
government between the two Nations, and as the Parliament hath already
taken into consideration the Reformation of Kirk government, so
they will proceed therein in due time, as shall best conduce to the glory of
God, the peace of the Kirk, and of both Kingdomes.</hi> And also severally:
for His Majestie knoweth that the custodie and vindication,
<pb n="129"/><anchor id="Pg129"/>
the conservation and purgation of Religion, are a
great part of the duetie of Civill authority and power. His
Majesties late practise while he was here in person, in resorting
frequently to the exercises of publike worship, His
Royall actions, in establishing the worship and government
of this Kirk in Parliament, and in giving order for a competent
maintenance to the Ministery and Seminaries of the
Kirk, and His Majesties gracious Letter to the Assembly (seconded
by the speech of His Majesties Commissioner) which
containes this religious expression: <hi rend='italic'>Where any thing is amisse,
we will endeavour a Reformation in a fair and orderly way,
and where Reformation is settled, we resolve with that authority
wherewith God hath vested us, to maintain and defend it in peace
and liberty, against all trouble that can come from without, and
against all Heresies, Sects, and Schismes, wich may arise from
within.</hi> All these doe make us hopeful that His Majestie
will not oppose, but advance the work of Reformation. In
like manner the Honourable Houses of Parliament, as they
have many times before witnessed their zeale, so now also
in their Declaration sent to the Assembly, which not only
sheweth the constancy of their zeale, but their great grief
that the worke hath been interrupted by a malignant party
of Papists and evill affected persons, especially of the corrupt
and dissolute Clergie, by the incitement and instigation
of Bishops and others, their hope according to their earnest
desire, when they shall returne to a peaceable and Parliamentary
proceding, by the blessing of God, to settle such a
Reformation in the Church, as shall be agreeable to Gods
word, and that the result shall be a most firm and stable union
between the two Kingdoms of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>
and <hi rend='italic'>Scotland</hi>, &amp;c. The
Assembly also is not a little encouraged by a Letter sent from
many reverend Brethren of the Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, expressing
their prayers and endeavours against every thing which shall
be found prejudiciall to the establishment of the Kingdome
of Christ, and the Peace of their Soveraigne. Upon these
encouragements, and having so patent a doore of hope, the
Assembly doth confidently expect, that <hi rend='italic'>England</hi> will now
bestirre themselves in the best way for a Reformation of Religion,
and do most willingly offer their prayers and utter-endeavours
<pb n="130"/><anchor id="Pg130"/>
for furthering so great a Work, wherein Christ
is so much concerned in his glory, the King in his honour,
the Kirk and Kingdome of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi> in their happinesse, and
this Kirk and Kingdome in the purity and peace of the
Gospel.
</p>

<p>
IV. That the Assembly also from so many reall invitations,
are heartened to renew the Proposition made by the
aforenamed Commissioners of this Kingdome, for beginning
the Work of Reformation, at the uniformity of Kirk-government.
For what hope can there be of Unity in Religion,
of one Confession of Faith, one Form of Worship,
&amp; one Catechisme, till there be first one Forme of Ecclesiasticall
Government? Yea, what hope can the Kingdome and
Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Scotland</hi> have of a firme and durable Peace, till Prelacie,
which hath been the main cause of their miseries and
troubles, first and last, be plucked up, root and branch, as
a plant which God hath not planted, and from which, no
better fruits can be expected then such sower grapes, as this
day set on edge the Kingdome of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>?
</p>

<p>
V. The Prelaticall Hierarchie being put out of the way,
the Work will be easie, without forcing of any conscience,
to settle in <hi rend='italic'>England</hi> the government of the Reformed Kirks
by Assemblies. For although the Reformed Kirks do hold,
without doubting, their Kirk Officers, and Kirk government
by Assemblies higher and lower, in their strong and
beautifull subordination, to be <hi rend='italic'>jure divinio</hi>, and perpetuall: yet
Prelacie, as it differeth from the Office of a Pastor, is almost
universally acknowledged by the Prelates themselves, and
their adherents, to be but an humane ordinance, introduced
by humane reason, and settled by humane Law and Custome
for supposed convenience: which therefore by humane
authority, without wronging any mans conscience, may
be altred and abolished upon so great a necessity, as is a hearty
conjunction with all the Reformed Kirks, a firm and well
grounded Peace betwixt the two Kingdomes, formerly divided
in themselves, and betwixt themselves by this partition
wall and a perfect Union of the Kirks in the two Nations:
which although by the providence of God in one Hand, &amp;
<pb n="131"/><anchor id="Pg131"/>
under one Monarch, yet ever since the Reformation, and
for the present also, are at greater difference in the point of
Kirk-government, which in all places hath a more powerfull influence
upon all the parts of Religion, then any other Reformed
Kirks, although in Nations at greatest distance, and under
divers Princes.
</p>

<p>
VI. What may be required of the Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Scotland</hi> for
furthering the Work of Uniformitie of Government, or for
agreeing upon a common Confession of Faith, Catechisme,
and directory for Worship, shall according to the order given
by this Assembly, be most willingly performed by Us,
who long extreamly for the day when King and Parliament
shall joyn for bringing to passe so great, so good a Work,
That all Warres and Commotions ceasing, all Superstition,
Idolatry, Heresie, Sects, and Schismes being removed, as
the Lord is one, so his name may be one amongst us; and
mercy and truth, righteousnesse and peace meeting together,
and kissing one another, may dwell in this Iland.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Act Sess. 8. Aug. 3. 1642.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Overtures for transplantation of Ministers; and provision
of Schools, ordained by the late Assembly at</hi>
Edinburgh <hi rend='italic'>to be sent to Synods, and
reported to this Assembly.</hi>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Act Sess. 11. <hi rend='italic'>Edinb.</hi> August 5. 1642.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>These Overtures underwritten, anent the transporting of Ministers
and Professors to Kirks and Colledges, being read in audience of the
Assembly, and thereafter revised by a Committee appointed for that effect,
The Assembly appoints them to be sent to the severall Synods,
to be considered by them, and they to report their judgements
thereof to the next Generall Assembly.</hi>
</p>

<p>
I. No transportation would be granted hereafter without
citation of parties having interest (<hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi> the Minister
who is sought and his Parish) to hear what they can oppose,
<pb n="132"/><anchor id="Pg132"/>
and the matter is to come first to both the Presbyteries (<hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi>
that wherein the Minister dwels, whose transportation is
sought, and the other Presbyterie to which he is sought
if the Kirks lye in several Presbyteries) and if the Presbyteries
agree not, then the matter is to be brought to the
Synod, or Generall Assembly (which of them shall first
occure after such transportation is sought) and if the Synod
(occurring first) agree not; or if there be appeale
made from it, then the matter is to come to the Generall
Assembly.
</p>

<p>
II. A Minister may be transplanted from a particular
Congregation (where he can onely doe good to a part) to
such a place, where he may benefit the whole Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Scotland</hi>
because, in reason the whole is to be preferred to a
part, such as <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>.
</p>

<p>
1. Because all the great Justice Courts sit there, as Councell,
Session, Justice Generall, Exchequer, &amp;c. and it
concerns the whole Kirk, that these Fountains of Justice be
kept clean, both in the point of Faith, and Manners.
</p>

<p>
2. Because there is great confluence to <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, from
time to time, of many of the chief Members of the whole
Kingdome, and it concerns the whole Kirk to have these
well seasoned, who (apparantly) are to be the Instruments
of keeping this Kirk and Kingdome in good temper.
</p>

<p>
That this may be the more easily done, the Assembly
first recommends to <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, that some young men of excellent
spirits may be (upon the charges of the said Town)
trained up, at home or abroad, toward the Ministery from
time to time. Secondly we meane not, that all the places
of the Ministrie of <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi> be filled with Ministers to be
transported by Authority of this Act, but only till they be
provided of one Minister (transplanted by the Authority of
the Assembly) for every Kirk in <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, and that the
rest of the places be filled either according to the Generall
Rules of transportation for the whole Kingdome, or by
agreement with actuall Ministers, and their Parishes, with
consent of the Presbyterie or Synod, to the which they
belong.
</p>

<p>
III. In the next roome, we finde, that it is a transporting of
<pb n="133"/><anchor id="Pg133"/>
Ministers for publike good, that Colledges, (having the
profession of Divinitie) be wel provided of professors.
</p>

<p>
Wherin the Colledge of Divinitie in S. <hi rend='italic'>Andrews</hi> is first
to be served without taking any Professors or Ministers
out of <hi rend='italic'>Edinburg</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi>,
or <hi rend='italic'>Aberdene</hi>, and then the rest of
the Colledges, would be provided for, as their necessity
shal require: yet (in respect of the present scarcity) it were
good for the Universities to send abroad for able and approved
men, to be Professors of Divinitie, that our Ministers
may be kept in their pastoriall charge as much as may be.
</p>

<p>
Towns also wherein Colledges are, are very considerable
in the matter of transportation.
</p>

<p>
IV. Also Congregations, where Noblemen have chief
residence are to be regarded, whether planted or unplanted,
and a care is to be had, that none be admitted Ministers
where Popish Noblemen reside, but such as are able men
(especially for controversies) by sight of the Presbyterie:
and moreover it is necessary, that such Minesters as dwell
where Popish Noblemen are, and are not able for controversies,
that they be transported.
</p>

<p>
V. They who desire the transportation of a Minister
should be obliged to give reasons for their desire: Neither
should any Presbyterie or Assembly, passe a sentence for transportation
of any Minister, till they give reasons for the expediencie
of the same, both to him and his Congregation, &amp;c.
to the Presbyterie whereof he is a member. If they acquiesce
to the reasons given, it is so much the better: if they
doe not acquiesce, yet the Presbyterie, or Assembly, (by
giving such reasons before the passing of their sentence) shal
make it manifest, that what they doe is not <hi rend='italic'>pro arbritratu, vel
imperio</hi> onely, but upon grounds of reason.
</p>

<p>
VI. Because there is such scarcity of Ministers having the
<hi rend='italic'>Iris</hi> tongue, necessity requires, that when they be found in
the Low-lands, they be transported to the High-lands: providing
their condition be not made worse, but rather better
by their transportation.
</p>

<p>
VII. In the point of voluntary transportation, no Minister
shal transact and agree with any Parish, to be transsported
thereto, without a full hearing of him, and his Parish, before
<pb n="134"/><anchor id="Pg134"/>
the Presbyterie to which he belongs in his present
charge, or superiour Kirk judicatories, if need shall be.
</p>

<p>
VIII. The planting of vacant Kirks, is not to be tyed to
any (either Ministers, or Expectants) within a Presbyterie:
but a free election is to be; according to the order of our
Kirk, and Lawes of our Kingdome.
</p>

<p>
IX. The chief Burghs of the Kingdome are to be desired
to traine up young men of excellent spirits for the ministery,
according to their power, as was recommended to <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>:
Which course will in time (God willing) prevent many
transplantations.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Overtures under-written anent the
Schooles being likewise read in audience of the Assembly,
they recommend the particulars therein mentioned, anent
the providing of the maintenance for School-masters to
the Parliament: And ordaine the rest to be sent to the
Synods, to be considered by them, and they to report
their judgements thereof to the next General
Assembly, as said is.</hi>
</p>

<p>
I. Every Parish would have a Reader and a Schoole, where
Children are to be bred, in reading, writing, and
grounds of Religion, according to the laudable Acts, both
of Kirk and Parliament, made before.
</p>

<p>
And where Grammar Schooles may be had, as in
Burghs, and other considerable places, (among which all
Presbyterial Seats are to be reputed) that they be erected,
and held hand to.
</p>

<p>
II. Anent these Schooles, every Minister with his Elders
shall give accompt to the Presbyteries at the visitation
of the Kirk: The Presbyteries are to make report to the Synode,
and the Synode to the General Assembly, that Schools
are planted, as above said, and how they are provided with
men and means.
</p>

<p>
III. And because this hath been most neglected in the
<pb n="135"/><anchor id="Pg135"/>
High-lands, Ilands, and borders. Therefore the Ministers
of every Parish are to instruct by their Commissioners, to the
next General Assembly, that this course is begun betwixt
and then: and they are further to certifie from one General
Assembly to another, whether this course is continued without
omission, or not.
</p>

<p>
IV. And because the means hitherto named or appointed
for Schooles of all sorts, hath been both little, and ill
payed, Therefore, beside former appointments, (the execution
whereof is humbly desired, and to be petitioned for
at the hands of His Majestie and the Parliament) the Assembly
would further supplicate this Parliament that they (in
their wisdome) would finde out how meanes shall be had
for so good an use, especially that the Children of poore
men, being very capable of learning, and of good engines,
may be trained up, according as the exigence and necessity
of every place shall require. And that the Commissioners,
who shall be named by this Assembly, to wait upon the Parliament
may be appointed to represent this to his Majestie,
and the Parliament, seeing His sacred Majestie, by his gracious
Letter hath put us in hope hereof, wherewith we have
been much refreshed.
</p>

<p>
V. The Assembly would supplicate the Parliament, that
for youths of the finest and best spirits of the High-lands,
and borders, maintenance may be allotted (as to Bursars)
to be bred in Universities.
</p>

<p>
VI. For the time and manner of visitation of Schooles,
and contriving the best and most compendious and orderly
course of teaching Grammar, we humbly desire the Assembly
to appoint a Committee for that effect, who may report
their diligence to the next General Assembly.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>The Overtures and Articles above-written being reported to this
Assembly, after reading and serious consideration thereof,
the Assembly approves the same, and ordaines them to have
the strength of an Act and ordinance of Assembly, in all
time-coming.</hi>
</quote>

</div>

<pb n="136"/><anchor id="Pg136"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Sess. 11. August 5. 1642.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act anent contrary Oaths.</hi></head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly finding the inconvenience of
contrary Oaths in trying of Adulteries, Fornications,
and other faults and scandals, do therefore for eviting there
of, discharge Synods, Presbyteries and Sessions, to take
Oath of both parties in all time hereafter, Recommending
to them in the mean time all other order and wayes of tryall
used in such cases: And that there may be a common order
and course kept in this Kirk of trying of publike scandals,
The Assembly ordains the Presbyteries to advise upon some
common order hereintill, and to report their judgements to
the next Assembly.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Overtures anent Family Exercises, Catechising,
keeping of Synods and Presbyteries, and restraint
of Adulteries, Witch-crafts, and other
grosse sins.</hi></head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Committee supplicates the Assembly</hi>,
</p>

<p>
I. To urge the severall Synods and Presbyteries, especially
these of the North, that Family Exercise in
Religion, visitation of the Churches, Catechising, keeping
of the Presbyteriall and Provinciall meetings (both by Preaching
and Ruling Elders) be more carefully observed.
</p>

<p>
II. That the Clerk at least subscribe every Book before it
come to the Assembly, and that every Act be noted on the
Margent, for a directory of expedition.
</p>

<p>
III. That the Assembly would seriously studie by all meanes
and wayes how to procure the Magistrates concurrence
to curb and punish these notorious vices which abound in the
Land, especially in the Northern parts.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>The Assembly approves the Overtures foresaids, and ordains them
to be observed: and for the last, the Assembly being confident of
<pb n="137"/><anchor id="Pg137"/>
the readinesse of the Judge Ordinar to restrain and punish these
faults, Do therefore ordain all Presbyteries to give up to the
Justice, the names of the Adulterers, incestuous persons,
Witches and sorcerers and others guilty of such grosse and fearfull
sins within their bounds that they may be Processed and
punished according to the Laws of this Kingdom; and that the
Presbyteries and Synods be carefull herein, as they will answer
to the Generall Assemblies, And because that Witch craft,
Charming, and such like proceeds many times from ignorance,
Therefore the Assembly ordains all Ministers, especially in these
parts where these sins are frequent, to be diligently Preaching,
Cathichising, and conferring, to inform their people thereintill.</hi>
</quote>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Sess. 11. Aug. 5. 1642.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act against Petitions, Declarations, &amp; suchlike in
name of Ministers, without their knowledge
and consents.</hi></head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly being informed, that after the Petition
presented to the Lords of His Majesties Privie
Councell by the Noblemen Burgesses, and Ministers, occasionally
met at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburg</hi> the 31.
day of <hi rend='italic'>May</hi> last by-past, had
received a very gracious Answer, There was another Petition
given in to their Lordships upon the 2 day of <hi rend='italic'>June</hi>
last, entituled, The Petition of the Nobilitie, Gentrie, Burrows,
Ministers, and Commons: which as it was not accompanied
with any one Minister to the Lords of Privie
Councell, so all the Ministers of this Assembly, disclaimes
and disavoweth any knowledge thereof, or accession thereto,
And the Assembly conceiving that the Kings Majestie Himself,
and all the Courts and Judicatories of this Kingdome
may be deluded and abused, and the Kirk in Generall, and
Ministers in particular injured and prejudged by the like
practises hereafter, Do therefore prohibite and discharge
all and every one to pretend or use the name of Ministers to
<pb n="138"/><anchor id="Pg138"/>
any Petition, Declaration, or suchlike at any time hereafter,
without their knowledge consent and assistance: And
if any shal doe the contrary, ordaines Presbyteries and
Provinciall Assemblies to proceed against them with the
highest censures of the Kirk.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Sess 11. Aug. 5. 1642.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act anent the Assemblies desires to the Lords of
Counsell, and Conservators of Peace.</hi></head>

<p>
The Assembly being most desirous to use all, and to omit
no lawful meane or occasion to testifie their zeale by dealing
with God and man, for furtherance of their desires of
Unity in Religion and uniformity of Kirk-government,
And considering the great necessity, that the Kirk and State
contribute joyntly their best endeavours to this happy end:
Therefore enjoynes the Moderator, and the commissioners
from the Assembly, to supplicate with all earnestnesse and
respect, the Lords of his Majesties Honourable Privie
Councel, and likewise the Commissioners appointed by
His Majestie, and the Parliament, for conservation of the
Peace, that they may be pleased to concur with the Kirk in
the like desires to His Majesty and the Parliament of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>,
and in the like directions to the Commissioners of this Kingdome,
at <hi rend='italic'>London</hi> for the time, that by all possible means,
Civill, and Ecclesiastick, this blessed Worke may be advanced,
and a happy settling betwixt His Majestie and His
Parliament, may be endeavoured, and the common Peace
betwixt the Kingdomes continued and strengthened.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n="139"/><anchor id="Pg139"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Sess. 11. Aug 5. 1642.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>The Assemblies humble desire to the Kings Majestie for
the Signator of 500 l. Sterling and recommendation
thereof to the Kings Commissioner.</hi></head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly having received the Report of
the proceedings of the Commissioners of the late Assembly,
and specially that His Majesty was graciously pleased,
upon their humble Petition, solemnly to promise and
declare under his Royall hand, his pious resolution and dedication
of 500. l. sterling, out of the readiest of his Rents
and revenues, to be imployed yearly on publike necessary
and pious uses of the Kirk, at the sight of the Generall Assembly,
as his Majestie gracious answer of the 3. of <hi rend='italic'>January</hi>,
1642. registrate in their books at His Majesties own desire,
for their further assurance of his Majesties pious zeale, doth
more fully proport. Likeas being informed that His Majestie
was gratiously pleased to signe and send down to the Kirk
the Signator of the said 500. l. yearly to have past the Exchequer,
albeit the samine is not as yet delivered; And
considering His Majesties pious directions to them by his
Majesties Letter to plant and visit the utmost skirts and borders
of the Kingdome, as most necessary for the glory of
God, the good of the Kirk, and His Majesties honour,
and service, which is only stopped by the want of charges
for publike visitations, And withall to remonstrate to His
Majestie by His Commissioner, their just and necessary
desires for what may further serve to the good of Religion,
whereunto His Majesties Commissioner promised his best endeavours
and assistance. Therefore the Assembly doth
most earnestly recommend to His Majesties Commissioner
to represent to His Majestie, with his best assistance, the
humble and necessary desires of the whole Assembly, that
His Majestie will be graciously pleased to command that
Signator, already signed by His Royall hand (or to signe
another of the samine tenor, whereof they deliver the just
double to his Maj Commissioner for that effect) to be sent to
<pb n="140"/><anchor id="Pg140"/>
this Kingdom, and delivered to the Commissioners from
this Assembly, who are to sit at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, or to the Procurator
of the Kirk, whereby his Majestie shall more and more
oblige this whole Kirk to pray for a blessing from Heaven
upon His Royal Person and Government.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Sess. 11. Aug. 5. 1642.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>The Assemblies Letter to the Commissioners of this
Kingdom at</hi> London.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Right Honourable</hi>,
</p>

<p>
We have received your Lordships Letter, with the Declaration
of the Parliament of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, and have sent
this Noble bearer to His Majesty with our humble Supplication,
and to your Lordships with our Answer earnestly
desiring Unity of Religion, and Uniformity of Kirk-government,
to be presented by your Lordships, and this
Noble bearer to the Honourable Houses of Parliament. Your
Lordships will perceive by the inclosed Copies, and by
our desires to His Majesties honourable Privie Councel and
Commissioners for the conservation of the Peace, to joyn
their best endeavours with his Majestie and the Parliament,
and their directions to your Lordships, by our leaving a
Commission behinde us, to concur with them in all Ecclesiastick
wayes, and by our appointing publike Prayers, and
a solemn Fast through this Kirk, for the furtherance of this
great work of Reformation, and continuance of the common
Peace, that this Unity in Religion and uniformity of
Kirk-government is the chiefest of our desires, prayers and
cares: Where unto as we have been encouraged by the faithful
labors of the Commissioners of this Kingdom in the late
Treaty, and continued and renewed by your Lordships;
so we are assured, that your Lordships will omit no lawful
mean, argument, or occasion of seconding the same there,
And advertising our Commissioners at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, wherein
they may further concur with your Lordships, for the furtherance
<pb n="141"/><anchor id="Pg141"/>
of the Work, which tends so much to the glory of
God, advancement of Christs Kingdom, increase of the honour
and happinesse of our Soveraign, and the peace and welfare
of these Kingdoms, whereby your Lordships will oblige
this Kirk more and more to pray for a blessing on your persons
and travels, and to rest.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Yours in the Lord</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>The Commissioners of the General Assembly.</hi>
</p>

<p>
S. Andrews <hi rend='italic'>5. Aug. 1642.</hi>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>A Letter from some Ministers of</hi> England.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Reverend and wel-beloved in our Lord and Saviour.</hi>
</p>

<p>
We received with much joy and satisfaction the Answer
which your General Assembly vouchsafed us to our Letters
of the last yeer. Some of us in the name of our Brethren,
thought it then fit by Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Alexander Henderson</hi> (a Brother
so justly approved by you, and honoured by us) to return
our deserved thanks. And we now further think it equall
upon this occasion, to make a more publike acknowledgement
of such a publike favour. You were then pleased to
give us fair grounds, to expect that brotherly advice and
endeavours, which the common cause of Christ, and the mutual
interest of the united Nations, command us now again
to ask, if not to chalenge. We doubt not but your experience,
together with your intelligence, abundantly informes
you of our condition, what various administrations
of providence we have passed through and we still lye
betwixt hopes and feares, a fit temper for working; the
God of all grace enable us to improve it. As our hopes are
not such as may make us fear, so neither doe our Feares prevail,
to the casting away our confidence. Your own late condition,
together with this Declaration of ours present, may
acquaint you with the certain, though subtil, authors &amp; fomentors
of these our confused conflicts: which we conceive
to be the Hierarchical faction, who have no way to peace &amp; safety,
but through the trouble &amp; danger of others. Our prayers
<pb n="142"/><anchor id="Pg142"/>
and endeavours, according to our measure, have been and
shall be for the supplanting and rooting up whatsoever we
finde so prejudicial to the establishment of the Kingdome
of Christ, and the peace of our Soveraigne. And that this
Declaration of ourselves may not leave you unsatisfied, we
think it necessary further to expresse, That the desire of the
most godly and considerable part amongst us, is, That the
Presbyterian Government, which hath just and evident
Foundation both in the Word of God, and religious reason,
may be established amongst us, and that (according to your
intimation) we may agree in one confession of Faith, one
directorie of Worship, one publike Catechisme and form
of Governement: Which things, if they were accomplished,
we should much rejoyce in our happy subjection to
Christ our Head, and our desired association with you our
beloved brethren. For the better effecting whereof, we
thought it necessary, not only to acquaint you with what
our desires are in themselves, but likewise to you, that is,
That what way shall seem most fit to the wisedom of that
grave and religious Assembly, may be taken for the furtherance
of our indeavours in this kind. We understand that
our Parliament hath been before hand with us in this intimation,
and it cannot but be our duty, who are so much concerned
in the businenesse, to adde what power the Lord hath
given us with you to the same purpose. This designe and
desire of ours hath enemies on the Left-hand; and dissenting
brethren on the Right; but we doubt not, that as our
hearts justifie us that our intentions are right, and such as
we conceive tend most to the glory of God, and the peace
of the Churches of the Saints; so (by your brotherly concurrence
in the most speedy and effectuall way you can find
out) the Work will in Gods due time receive a prayed for,
hoped for issue. We shall not need by many arguments
from mutuall Nationall interest (though we know you will
not overlook them) to inforce this request, the firme
bond wherewith we are all united in our Lord Jesus Christ,
we are assured will alone engage your faithfull endeavours
in this businesse. To him we commit you, with these
great and important affairs you have in hand. Be pleased to
<pb n="143"/><anchor id="Pg143"/>
accept of these as the expression of the mindes of our many
godly and faithfull Brethren, whose hearts we doubt not
of, neither need you, though their hands in regard of the
suddennesse of this opportunity could not be subscribed together
with ours, who are.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Your most affectionate Friends and
Brethren in the work of the Lord.</hi>
</p>

<p>
London, <hi rend='italic'>22. July, 1642.</hi>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Answer to the Ministers Letter.</hi></head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Right Reverend and beloved in the Lord Jesus.</hi>
</p>

<p>
By our Answer to the Declaration sent unto us from the
honourable Houses of Parliament, ye may perceive that
your Letter which came into our hands so seasonably, was
not only acceptable unto us, but hath also encouraged us to
renew both to the Kings Majestie and the Houses of Parliament,
The desires of the late Commissioners of this Kingdome
for Unity in Religion, in the four particulars remembred
by you, we cannot be ignorant but the opposition from
Satan and worldly men in Kirk and Policy, will still be vehement
as it hath been already, But we are confident
through our Lord Jesus Christ, that the prayers and indeavours
of the godly in both Kingdoms, will bring the work
to a wished, and blessed Issue. This whole national Kirk
is so much concerned in that Reformation and Unity of Religion
in both Kingdomes, that without it we cannot hope
for any long time to enjoy our puritie and peace, which
hath cost us so dear, and is now our chiefest comfort and
greatest treasure: Which one cause (beside the Honour of
God, and the happinesse of the People of God in that Kingdome,
more desired of us then Our lives) is more then
sufficient to move us, To contribute all that is in our power
for bringing it to passe. And since we have with so great liberty
made our desires and hopes known both to King and
Parliament, it is a duety incombent both to you and us, who
make mention of the Lord, and are Watch-men upon the
<pb n="144"/><anchor id="Pg144"/>
Walls of <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>, never more to keep silence nor to hold
our peace day nor night, till the Righteousnesse of Sion go
forth as brightnesse, and the salvation thereof as a lamp that
burneth. And if it shall please the Lord to move the hearts
of King and Parliament, to hearken unto the motion, for
which end we have resolved to keep a solemne Fast and Humiliation
in all the Kirks of this Kingdome, the mean by
which we have prevailed in times past, we wish that the Work
may be begun with speed, and prosecuted with diligence
by the joint labours of some Divines in both Kingdoms,
who may prepare the same for the view and examination of
a more frequent Ecclesiastick meeting of the best affected to
Reformation there, and of the Commissioners of the General
Assembly here, that in end it may have the approbation
of the Generall Assembly here, and of all the Kirks there,
in the best way that may be, we wish &amp; hope at last in a nationall
Assembly; Our Commissioners at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, shall in
our name receive and returne answers for promoving so
great a Work, which we with our heart and our soule
recommend to the blessing of God, we continue,
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Your loving brethren and
fellow-labourers.</hi>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act for the Lord</hi> Maitlands <hi rend='italic'>presenting the
Assemblies Supplication to His Majestie, and for
going to the Commissioners at</hi> London, <hi rend='italic'>with
the Answer to the Parliament of</hi>
Englands <hi rend='italic'>Declaration</hi>.</head>

<p>
The General Assembly considering the necessity of sending
some person of good worth &amp; quality for to present
their humble Supplication to His Majestie, and to deliver
their directions to the Commissioners of this Kingdom,
now at <hi rend='italic'>London</hi>, with their Declaration to the Parliament of
<hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, and Answer to some wel-affected Ministers of that
Kirk: And having certain knowledge of the worth, ability,
<pb n="145"/><anchor id="Pg145"/>
and faithfulnesse of <hi rend='italic'>John</hi>
Lord <hi rend='italic'>Maitland</hi>, one of their number,
who being witnesse to all their intentions and proceedings,
can best relate their true loyaltie and respect to their
Soveraign, and brotherly affection to the Kirk and Kingdom
of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi> therein; Therefore do unanimously require
his Lordships pains, by repairing to Court and to <hi rend='italic'>London</hi>
for the premisses, which hereby they commit to this diligence
and fidelity, willing his Lordship to make account of
his proceedings herein to their Commissioners appointed to
sit at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Sess. 11. August 5. post meridiem.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Commission for publike affairs of this Kirk, and for prosecuting
the desires of this Assembly to His
Majestie, and the Parliament
of</hi> England.</head>

<p>
The General Assembly considering the laudable custome
of this Kirk for to appoint some Commissioners in the
interim betwixt Assemblies, for presenting of Overtures and
prosecuting the other desires of the Kirk to His Majestie, the
Lords of His Councell, and the Estates of Parliament; And
taking to their consideration the present condition of the
Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, with the Declaration thereof sent down
from the Parliament, and some Reverend Brethren of the Ministery
there, with their own Answer to the Parliament and
Ministery, and their humble Supplication to His Majestie
for Unity of Religion and Uniformity of Kirk-government.
And withall remembring their desires to the Honourable
Lords of His Majesties secret Councell, and to
the Commissioners appointed by the King and Parliament,
for conservation of the common Peace, That they would
joyn their concourse in their desires to His Majestie and
Parliament, and directions to the Commissioners of this
Kingdom at <hi rend='italic'>London</hi> for the time. And likewise considering
their good hopes from Gods gracious favour to this Island,
that by his good providence he will in his own way and time
settle this great Work through this whole Ile; And that it
<pb n="146"/><anchor id="Pg146"/>
is both our earnest desire and Christian duty to use all lawfull
means and Ecclesiastick wayes for furtherance of so
great a Work, continuance of the common peace betwixt
these nations, and keeping a brotherly correspondence
betwixt these Kirks. Therfore the Assembly thinks it necessary
before their dissolving, to appoint, and by these
Presents do nominate and appoint, Masters <hi rend='italic'>Andrew Ramsay</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Alex Henderson</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Robert Dowglas</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>William Colvill</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>William
Bennet</hi> Ministers at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>Mr. William Arthur</hi> Minister
at <hi rend='italic'>St. Cuthbert</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Mr. James Robertson</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>John Logan</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Robert
Lighton</hi>, Commissioners from <hi rend='italic'>Dalkeith</hi> Assembly:
Masters, <hi rend='italic'>Andrew Blackhall</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>James
Fleeming</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Robert Ker</hi>,
Commissioners from <hi rend='italic'>Hadingtoun</hi> to the Assembly. Masters,
<hi rend='italic'>George Hamilton</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Robert Clair</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Arthur Mortoun</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>David Dalgleish</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Andrew Bennet</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Walter Greg</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>John Moncreff</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>John Smith</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>George Gillespie</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>John Row</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>John Duncan</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Walter
Bruce</hi>, Commissioners for the Presbyteries within the Province
of <hi rend='italic'>Fyffe</hi>: <hi rend='italic'>Mr. David Calderwood</hi>
Minister at <hi rend='italic'>Pencait</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Mr. John Adamson</hi>
Principall of the Colledge of <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Mr. John Strang</hi> Principall of the Colledge of
<hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Mr.
David Dikson</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Mr. James Bonar</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Mr. Robert Bailie</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Mr. John
Bell</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Mr Robert Ramsay</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Mr.
George Young</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Mr Henry Guthrie</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Mr. Samuel Oustein</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Mr. John Robertson</hi>
Minister at <hi rend='italic'>St. Johnstoun</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Mr. John
Robertson</hi> Minister at <hi rend='italic'>Dundie</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Mr.
John Hume</hi> Minister at <hi rend='italic'>Heckills</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Mr.
Andrew Cant</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Mr William Guild</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Mr.
Samuel Rutherfurd</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Mr. James Martin</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Mr. Alexander Monroe</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Mr.
Robert Murray</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Mr. John Maclellan</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Mr. Andrew Doncanson</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Mr. Silvester Lambie</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Mr. Gilbert Ross</hi>,
Ministers: Marquesse
of <hi rend='italic'>Argile</hi>, Earles of <hi rend='italic'>Lauderdaile</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Glencarne</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Kingborne</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Eglintoun</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Weemes</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Cassils</hi>: Lords <hi rend='italic'>Gordoun</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Maitland</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Balcarras</hi>, Sir <hi rend='italic'>Patrick Hepburne</hi>
of <hi rend='italic'>Wauchtoun</hi>, Sir <hi rend='italic'>David
Hum</hi> of <hi rend='italic'>Wedderburne</hi>, Sir
<hi rend='italic'>David Creightoun</hi> of <hi rend='italic'>Lugtoun</hi>, Sir
<hi rend='italic'>David Barclay</hi> of <hi rend='italic'>Cullearnie</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>John Henderson</hi> of <hi rend='italic'>Fordell</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Mr. George Winrame</hi> of <hi rend='italic'>Libertoun</hi>,
Sir <hi rend='italic'>Robert Drummond</hi>, Sir <hi rend='italic'>William
Carmichaell</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>John Binnie</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Thomas
Paterson</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>John Sempill</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>John Kennedy</hi> of <hi rend='italic'>Air</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>John Leslie</hi> from <hi rend='italic'>Aberdene</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>William Glendinning</hi> Provest of <hi rend='italic'>Kirkubrigh</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>John Colzear</hi>, Ruling Elders with the concurse of the
Procurator of the Kirk: and grants to them full Power and Commission in this
<pb n="147"/><anchor id="Pg147"/>
<hi rend='italic'>interim</hi>, betwixt and the next Assembly, for to meet and
conveen at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi> upon the 17. day of this moneth of
<hi rend='italic'>August</hi>, and upon any other day, or in any other place, as
they shall think convenient: And being met and conveened,
or any fifteen of them, there being alwayes twelve Ministers
present: With full power for to consider and performe
what they finde necessary for the Ministerie, by preaching,
supplicating, prepairing of draughts of one Confession,
one Cathechisme, one directory of publike Worship
(which are alwayes to be revised by the next Generall
Assembly) and by all other lawfull &amp; Ecclesiastick wayes,
for furtherance of this great Work in the Union of this
Iland in Religion and Kirk-government, and for continuance
of our own peace at home, and of the common peace
betwixt the Nations, and keeping of good correspondence
betwixt the Kirks of this Iland. Like as if it shall please
God to blesse the prayers and endeavours of his Saints for
this blessed Union, and that if either the Lords of Councell,
or Commissioners for the Peace shall require their
concurse at home or abroad, by sending Commissioners
with theirs to His Majesty and Parliament for that effect,
or that they themselves shall finde it necessary; The Assembly
grants full power to them, not only to concurre by
all lawfull and Ecclesiastick wayes, with the Councell
and Conservators of the Peace at home, but also to send
some to present and prosecute their desires and humble
advice to His Majesty and the Parliament, and the Ministerie
there, for the furthering and perfecting of so good
and great a Worke. Like as, with power to them to promove
their other desires, overtures and recommendations
of this Assembly, to the Kings Majestie, Lords of Councell,
Session, Exchequer, and Commissioners of Parliament,
for plantation of Kirks, for common burdens, or
conservation of the common peace, and to the Parliament
of this Kingdom, in case it fall out <hi rend='italic'>pro re nata</hi> before the
next Assembly. And such like, with as full power to
them to proceed, treat and determine in any other matters
to be committed to them by this Assembly, as if the samine
were herein particularly insert, and with as ample power to
<pb n="148"/><anchor id="Pg148"/>
proceede in the matters particularly or generally above-mentioned,
as any Commissioners of Generall Assemblies
have had, and have been in use of before: They being
alwayes comptable to, and censurable by the next Generall
Assembly, for their proceedings thereanent.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Sess. 13. Aug. 6. 1642.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>A Petition from some distressed Professors
in</hi> Ireland.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>To the reverend and right Honourable the
Moderator and remanent members
of the Generall Assembly of</hi>
Scotland, <hi rend='italic'>conveened at S.</hi>
Andrews, <hi rend='italic'>July 1642</hi>.
</p>

<p>
The humble Petition of the most part of the Scottish
Nation in the North of <hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi>, in their own
names, and in name of the rest of the
Protestants there.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Humbly sheweth</hi>,
</p>

<p>
That where your Petitioners, by the great blessing of the
Lord, enjoyed for a little while a peaceable and fruitfull
Ministerie of the Gospel, yet through our own abuse of
so rich a mercy, and through the tyrannie of the Prelates,
we have been a long time spoiled of our Ministers (a yoke
to many of us heavier then death) who being chased into
<hi rend='italic'>Scotland</hi>, were not altogether un-usefull in the day of your
need; And we having been since oppressed and scattered,
as sheep who have no shepherd, now at last the wise and
righteous hand of the Lord, by the sword of the Rebels,
hath bereft us of our friends, and spoiled us of our goods, &amp;c.
left us but a few, and that a poor handfull of many, and
<pb n="149"/><anchor id="Pg149"/>
hath chased from us the rest that were called our Ministers;
the greatest part whereof we could scarce esteem such as
being rather Officers to put the Prelats Injunctions in execution,
then feeders of our souls: So that now being visited
with sword and sicknesse, and under some apprehension
of famine, if withall we shall taste of the sorest of all
plagues, to be altogether deprived of the Ministery of the
Word, we shall become in so much a worse condition
then any Pagans, as that once we enjoyed a better: Neither
know we what hand to turn us to for help, but to the
Land so far obliged by the Lords late rare mercies, and so
far enriched to furnish help of that kinde; a Land whence
many of us drew our blood and breath and where (pardon
the necessary boldnesse) some of our own Ministers now are,
who were so violently plucked from us, so sore against both
their own and our wills; yea, the Land that so tenderly
in their bosoms received our poor out-casts, and that hath
already sent us so rich a supply of able and prosperous Souldiers
to revenge our wrong.
</p>

<p>
Therefore, although we know that your zeale and brotherly
affection would urge you to take notice without our
advertisement, yet give us leave in the bowels of our Lord
Jesus Christ, to intreat, if there be any consolation in Christ,
if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the spirit, if any
bowels of mercy, that now in this nick of time, when the
sword of the Enemie making way for a more profitable entertaining
the Gospel, having also banished the Prelates, and
their followers, when our extremity of distreste, and the
fair hopes of speedy settling of peace, hath opened so fair a
doore to the Gospel, you would take the cause of your younger
sister, that hath no brests, to your serious consideration,
and pity poore <hi rend='italic'>Macedonians</hi> crying to you that ye would come
over and help us, being the servants of the God of your Fathers,
and claiming interest with you in a common Covenant,
that according to the good hand of God upon us, ye
may send us Ministers for the house of our God. We do
not take upon us to prescribe to you the way or the number,
but in the view of all, the finger of the Lord points at these,
whom though persecution of the Prelats drew from us, yet
<pb n="150"/><anchor id="Pg150"/>
our interest in them could not be taken away, wherein we
trust in regard of severall of them, called home by death,
your bounty will super-adde some able men of your own
that may help to lay the foundation of Gods house, according
to the Pattern. But for these so unjustly reft from us,
not only our necessity, but equity pleads, that either you
would send them all over, which were a Work to be parallelled
to the glories of the Primitive times, or at least that
ye would declare them transportable, that when Invitators
shall be sent to any of them, wherein they may discerne a
call from God, there may be no difficultie in their loosing
from thence, but they may come back to perfect what they
began, and may get praise and fame in the Land, where
they were put to shame. Neither are you to question your
power over us so to doe, or crave a president of your own
practise in that kind, for our extraordinary need calling on
you, furnisheth you with a power to make this a president
for the like cases hereafter: herein if you shall lay aside the
particular concernment of some few places, which you may
easily out of your rich Nurseries plant again, and make use
of your publike spirits, which are not spent, but increases
by your so many noble designes; you shall leave upon us and
our posteritie the stamp of an obligation that cannot be delete,
or that cannot be expressed; you should send to all the
neighbouring Churches a pattern, and erect for after-ages a
monument of self-denying tender zeale; you shall disburden
the Land of the many outcasts, who will follow over
their Ministers; and you shall make it appear, that the
churlish bounty of the Prelats, which at first cast some of
these men over to us, is not comparable with the cheerful liberalitie
of a rightly constitute General Assembly, to whom
we are perswaded, the Lord will give seed for the loane
which you bestow on the Lord; yea, the day may come,
when a General Assembly in this Land may returne to you
the first fruits of thanks, for the plants of your free gift.
And although you were scant of furniture of this kinde your
selves, or might apprehend more need then formerly, yet
doubtlesse, your bowels of compassion would make your
deep povertie even in a great tryal of affliction, abound to
<pb n="151"/><anchor id="Pg151"/>
the riches of your liberalitie. But now seeing you abound
in all things, and have formerly given so ample a proof of
your large bestowing on Churches abroad in <hi rend='italic'>Germanie</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>France</hi>, knowing that you are not wearied in well-doing,
we confidently promise to our selves in your name, that we
will abound in this grace also, following the example of
our Lord and the Primitive Churches, who alwayes sent
out Disciples in paires. But if herein our hopes shall faile
us, we shall not know whether to wish that we had died
with our Brethren by the Enemies hand; for we shall be as
if it were said unto us, <hi rend='italic'>Goe serve other Gods</hi>; Yet looking for
another kinde of Answer at your hands, for in this you are
to us as an Angel of God, we have sent these bearers, M. <hi rend='italic'>John
Gordoun</hi>, and M. <hi rend='italic'>Hugh Campbell</hi> our brethren, who may more
particularly in-forme you of our case, and desire that at their
returne, they may refresh the bowels of
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Your most instant and earnest Supplicants.</hi>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Commission to some Ministers to go to</hi>
Ireland.</head>

<p>
The Assembly having received a Petition, subscribed by
a considerable number in the North of <hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi>, intimating
their deplorable condition, through want of the Ministerie
of the Gospel, occasioned by the tyrannie of the Prelats,
and the sword of the Rebels, and desiring some
Ministers, especially such as had been chased from them,
by the persecution of the Prelats, and some others to be added,
either to be sent presently over to reside amongst them,
or declared transportable, that upon invitation from them
they might goe and settle there; together with some particular
Petitions, desiring the returne of some particular Ministers,
who had laboured there before: All which the
Assembly hath taken to their serious consideration, being
most heartily willing to sympathize with every member of
Christs Body, although never so remote; much more with
<pb n="152"/><anchor id="Pg152"/>
that Plantation there, which for the most part was a Branch
of the Lords Vine, planted in this Land. In which sollicitude,
as they would be loath to usurpe without their own
bounds or stretch themselves beyond their oun measure; so
they dare not be wanting, to the enlargement of Christs
Kingdome, where so loud a cry of so extreame neccesitie,
could not but stirre up the bowels of Christian compassion.
And although they conceive that the present unsettled
condition both of Church, and State, and Land, will
not suffer them as yet to loose any to make constant abode
there; yet they have resolved to send over some for the present
exigent till the next Gen. Assembly, by courses to stay
there four moneths allanerly: And therefore doe hereby
authorize and give Commission to the persons following, to
wit, M. <hi rend='italic'>Robert Blair</hi>, Minister at S.
<hi rend='italic'>Andrews</hi>, and M. <hi rend='italic'>James
Hamilton</hi>, Minister at <hi rend='italic'>Dumfreis</hi> for the first four moneths:
M. <hi rend='italic'>Robert Ramsay</hi>, Minister at <hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi>,
and M. <hi rend='italic'>John Mac'elland</hi>,
Minister at <hi rend='italic'>Kirkudbright</hi>, for the next four moneths:
And to M. <hi rend='italic'>Robert Baillie</hi>, Professor of Divinitie
in the Universitie of <hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi>, and M.
<hi rend='italic'>John Levistoun</hi>, Minister of <hi rend='italic'>Stranaire</hi>,
for the last four moneths: To repair into the North
of <hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi>, and there to visit, comfort, instruct and encourage
the scattered flocks of Christ, to employ to their uttermost
with all faithfulnesse and singlenesse of heart, in planting
and watering, according to the direction of Jesus
Christ, and according to the doctrine and discipline of this
Church in all things, And if need be (with concurrence
of such of the Ministers of the Army as are there) to try and
ordain such as shall be found qualified for the Ministerie,
Giving charge unto the persons foresaid in the sight of God,
that in Doctrine, in Worship, in Discipline, and in their
dayly conversation, they studie to approve themselves as
the Ministers of Jesus Christ, and that they be comptable
to the General Assembly of this Kirk, in all things. And in
case if any of the above-mentioned Ministers be impeded by
sickness or otherwise necessarily detained from this service,
the Assembly ordaines the Commissioners residing at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>,
for the publike affairs of the Church, to nominate in
their place well qualified men, who hereby are authorized
<pb n="153"/><anchor id="Pg153"/>
to undertake the foresaid imployment, as if they had been
expressely nominate in the face of the Assembly. And this,
although possibly it shall not fully satisfie the large expectation
of the Brethren in <hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi>, yet the Assembly is confident
they will take in good part at this time, that which is judged
most convenient for their present condition, even a lent mite
out of their own, not very great plenty, to supply the present
necessity; requiring of them no other recompence, but
that they in all cheerefulnesse may embrace and make use of
salvation, and promising to enlarge their indebted bounty
at the next Assembly, as they shall finde the Worke of the
Lord there to require. In the meane while, wishing that
these who are sent, may come with the full blessing of the
Gospel and peace, and recommending them, their labours,
and these to whom they are sent, to the rich blessing of the
great Shepherd of the flock.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Sess. 13. August 6. 1642.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act against slandering of Ministers.</hi></head>

<p>
The General Assembly considering the malice of divers
Persons in raising calumnies and scandals against Ministers,
which is not onely injurious to their persons, and discreditable
to the holy calling of the Ministerie, but doth also
prove often a great prejudice and hinderance to the promoving
of the Gospel: Doe therefore ordain Presbyteries and
Synods to proceed diligently in processe against all persons,
that shall reproach or scandal Ministers, with the censures of
the Kirk, even to the highest, according as they shall finde
the degree or quality of the scandal deserve.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act anent ordering of the Assembly House.</hi></head>

<p>
The Assembly for better order in time coming ordains
the Act of the Assembly at <hi rend='italic'>Aberdene</hi> for ordering the
<pb n="154"/><anchor id="Pg154"/>
House of the Assembly to be kept hereafter punctually. And
for that effect, that the samine be reade the first Session of
every Assembly.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act for remembring in publike Prayers the
desires of the Assembly to the King and Parliament,
and indiction of a publike Fast.</hi></head>

<p>
The General Assembly being desirous to promove the
great work of Unity in Religion, and Uniformity in
Church government, in all thir three Dominions, for
which the Assembly hath humbly supplicate the Kings Majestie,
and remonstrate their desires to the Parliament of
<hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, lest they should be wanting in any meane that may
further so glorious and so good a work: Doe ordain, that
not only the said Declaration to the Parliament, and supplication
to the Kings Majestie, shall be accompanied with
the earnest Petition, and prayers of the whole brethren in
private and publike, for the Lords blessing hereunto, according
to the laudable custome of our predecessors, who
in the year of God 1589. ordaines that the Brethren in their
private and publike prayers, recommend unto God the estate
of the afflicted Church of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>: But having just cause of
fear, that the iniquities of the Land, which so much abount
may marre this so great a Work, doe also ordain a
solemne Fast to be kept on the second Lords Day of <hi rend='italic'>September</hi>
and the Wednesday following throughout the whole
Kingdome for the causes after specified.
</p>

<p>
I. Grosse ignorance and all sort of wickedness among the
greater part, security, meer formality and unfruitfulnesse
among the best, and unthankfulnesse in all.
</p>

<p>
II. The sword raging throughout all Christendome, but
most barbarously in <hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi>, and dayly more and more threatned
in <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, through the lamentable division betwixt the
King and the Parliament there, tending to the subversion of
Religion and Peace in all the three Kingdomes.
</p>

<pb n="155"/><anchor id="Pg155"/>

<p>
III. That God may graciously blesse the Supplication of
the Assembly to the Kings Majesty, and their motion to the
Parliament of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, for Unitie in Religion, and Uniformity
of Kirk-government, and all other meanes which may
serve for the promoving of so great a Worke, and advancement
of the Kingdome of Christ every where.
</p>

<p>
IV. That God may powerfully overturne all wicked plots
and designes of Antichrist and his followers, and all divisive
motions against the course of Reformation, and the so much
longed for Union of the King and Parliament.
</p>

<p>
V. That God may blesse the harvest.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Reference from the Presbyterie of</hi> Kirkcaldie.</head>

<p>
Anent the Acts of Assemblies, for observation of the
Lords Day, profaned by going of salt-pannes, That
this Assembly would declare the limits of the Sabbath,
during which the pannes should stand.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Assembly referres the Answer of this Question, to the Acts
of former Assemblies.</hi>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Reference frrom the Synode of</hi> Fyffe.</head>

<p>
That the Provinciall of <hi rend='italic'>Angus</hi> keep their meeting on the
same day with the Synod of <hi rend='italic'>Fyffe</hi>, which breakes the
correspondence between them, appointed by the General
Assembly of <hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi>.
</p>

<p>
ANSWER.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Assembly ordaines the Provinciall Assembly of</hi> Angus
<hi rend='italic'>to keep
their first meeting upon the third Tuesday of</hi> April, <hi rend='italic'>comforme to
the Act of the said Assembly of</hi> Glasgow.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="156"/><anchor id="Pg156"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Overtures to be advised by Presbyteries
against the next Assembly.</hi></head>

<p>
How Appeals shall be brought into the Generall Assemblies,
and by what sort of citation.
</p>

<p>
What shall be the prescription of scandalls, within what
space of time shall they be challenged, whether after three
years, the Minister having been allowed and approved in
life and doctrine by Synods, Presbyteries, and Visitations.
</p>

<p>
What order shall be taken for keeping general Assemblies,
when Presbyteries send not the full number of Commissioners:
Or when the Commissioners abide not until the conclusion
and dissolving of the Assembly.
</p>

<p>
Order to be advised for Testimonials.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Assembly appoints the next Generall Assembly
to hold at</hi> Edinburgh, <hi rend='italic'>the first Wednesday
of August, 1643.</hi>
</p>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<pb n="157"/><anchor id="Pg157"/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>The Generall Assembly at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi></head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Sess. 1. August 2. 1643.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>The Kings Letter to the General Assembly.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Presented by his Majesties Commissioner
Sir</hi> Thomas Hope <hi rend='italic'>of Craighall Knight,
His Majesties Advocate.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Charles R.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Trustie and welbeloved, We greet you well.
The time now approaching for the holding of
the Generall Assembly of Our Kirk of Scotland,
and We having appointed Sir <hi rend='italic'>Thomas
Hope</hi> Our Advocate to be Our Commissioner
there; We thought good to present him there with these
Our Letters, and to take this occasion to minde you of the
duty which you owe to Us your Soveraigne, and to the
peace of that Our Native Kingdome. How far We have
lately extended Our grace and favour towards satisfaction
of your humble desires, there is not any amongst you but
may well remember: And therefore in this conjuncture
of Our affairs, it is but reasonable that We expect from you
such moderation in the dutifull proceedings of this Assembly,
as may concurre with our Princely inclinations and
<pb n="158"/><anchor id="Pg158"/>
desires, to preserve that Kirk and that our Kingdome in
peace; having wel observed that alterations in points of
Religion, are often the inlets to civill dissentions, and the
hazard, if not overthrow of both Kirk and Kingdomes.
Therefore of Our great affection and speciall tendernesse
to your peace (who of all Our Dominions are yet happie
therein to the envy of others) We conjure and require you
in the fear of God, and obedience of Us his Vicegerent,
that your endeavours and consultations tend onely to preserve
peace and quietnesse among you. And so We bid
you farewell. Given at Our Court at Oxford the 22. day
of July, 1643.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>To our right trusty and welbeloved Counsellour, Sir</hi> Thomas
Hope <hi rend='italic'>Knight, our Advocate general, and Our Commissioner
at the generall assembly of the Kirk in Our Kingdome of Scotland,
and to the rest of the said Assembly now conveened.</hi>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Sess. 2. August 3. 1643.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Overtures anent Bills, References, and Appeales.</hi></head>

<p>
I. That all Bills whatsoever of particular concernments
whereunto all parties having interest are not cited,
should be rejected.
</p>

<p>
II. That all Bills be first presented to the inferiour Judicatories
of the Kirk, who may competently consider of them,
and from them be orderly and <hi rend='italic'>gradatim</hi> brought to the Assembly,
according to the order prescribed for Appellations
in the Assembly of Edinburgh, 1639. in the 24. Sess. August
30.
</p>

<p>
III. That the said Act of Assembly 1639. anent Appelations,
be also extended to References.
</p>

<p>
IV. In Appellations and References of particular concernment,
if all parties having interest, have been present
in the inferiour Judicatorie when the Appeal and Reference
was made, then there is no necessitie of citation. But in
case of their absence, citation of parties is so necessar, that
<pb n="159"/><anchor id="Pg159"/>
if it be wanting, Appellations and References should not
be received.
</p>

<p>
V. That conform to former Acts of Assemblies; Appellations
<hi rend='italic'>post sententiam</hi> be made within ten dayes after the sentence,
and otherwise not to be respected.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Assembly ordaines their Overtures to be given to the severall
Committees for their direction.</hi>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Sess. 3. August 4. 1643.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act for election of Professours to be Commissioners
to Assemblies by Presbyteries.</hi></head>

<p>
The Assembly thinks, if Professours of Divinitie in
Universities be Ministers, that they may be chosen
Commissioners to the Generall Assembly, either by the
Presbyterie as Ministers or by the Universitie as Professours
of Divinitie.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Sess. 4. Aug. 5. 1643.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>The Petition of the distressed Professours in
Ireland for Ministers.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>To the reverend and honourable Moderatour and remanent
Members of the General Assembly of Scotland,
conveened at Edinburgh, Aug.</hi> 1643.
</p>

<p>
The humble Petition of the distressed Christians
in the North of Ireland.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Humbly sheweth,</hi>
</p>

<p>
That whereas you were pleased the last Year to take notice
of our Petition, and conceived so favourable an act
in our behalf, from our hearts we blesse the Lord God of
<pb n="160"/><anchor id="Pg160"/>
our Fathers, who put such a thing as this in your heart to
begin in any sort to beautifie the House of the Lord amongst
us: Doubtlesse you have brought upon your selves the blessing
of them who consider the poor; the Lord will certainly
deliver you in the time of trouble. We trust no distance of
place, no length of time, no pressure of affiction, yea,
nor smiling of prosperity, shall delete out of our thankfull
memories the humble acknowledgement of your so motherly
care: in drawing out your breasts, yea, your souls
to satisfie the hungrie: although we have been beaten with
the sword, bitten with famine, our own wickednes correcting
us, our back-slidings reproving us, yet we have
not so farre forgotten the Lords ancient love, but that our
hearts were brought to a little reviving in the midst of our
bondage, by the Ministery of these, who at your direction
made a short visit amongst us. We know you did not conceive
it expedient at that time, to loose any for full settling
here, till the waters of the bloudy inundation were
somewhat abated, and prohability might be of some comfortable
abode, which we through the Lords revenging
hand, pursuing our enemies, and the vigilancie of your
victorious Army, is in a great measure attained unto. Whatsoever
might have detained some of these whom ye directed
to us, whose stay made our expectation prove abortive, we
shall ascribe it to our own abuse of such treasure, and want
of spirituall hunger, occasioned justly through the want of
food; And yet that same dis-appointment, together with
your faithfull promise of inlarging your indebted bountie,
which is put upon record in all our hearts, hath made us conceive
the seed of a lively expectation, that you will now no
more put your bountie, and the means of our life, into the
hazard of such frustrations, but will once for all, bestow an
ample and enduring blessing. And of this we are so much
the more confident, because our former suit was not denyed
but delayed: only we fear, if a new delay be procured,
till all things be fully settled, that the observing of winde
and clouds, shall hinder both sowing and reaping. And in
the mean time, the Prelates and their Faction may step in
and invest themselves of their old tyrannie over our consciences,
<pb n="161"/><anchor id="Pg161"/>
who if they once shall see us possessed of our own
Inheritance, those <hi rend='italic'>Canaanites</hi> dare not offer to thrust us out.
By all appearance, if the Jesuites had any hope to finde
welcome amongst us, they had provided us fully ere now
with their poysoned plants, Our hearts abhorre the checking
or suspecting of your proceedings, yet it is lawfull to
learn sometime from our enemie: But in this you have begun
before, not only to do, but also to be forward a year
ago, and thereby have ingaged your selves to perfect your
own beginnings, and bring us out of our orphan condition.
We are fallen in your lap, this ruine must be under your
hand; you cannot pretend want of bread or cloathing, you
must be healers: We have chosen you curators to your little
young sister that wants breasts; there is none in earth to take
her out of your hand, for we will not, nor cannot hide it
from your Honours and Wisedome, that we want bread,
and must not only, as before, have a bit for our present
need, but also seed to sow the Land.
</p>

<p>
It is therefore our humble and earnest desire, that you
would yet again look on our former Petition, and your own
obligatorie Act, and at least declare your consent, that a competent
number of our own Ministers may be loosed to settle
here, and break bread to the children that lye fainting at the
head of all streets, which although it may be accounted but
a restoring of what we lost, and you have found, yet we
shall esteem it as the most precious gift that earth can affoord.
When they are so loosed, if they finde not all things concurring
to clear Gods calling, it will be in their hand to forbear
and you have testified your bountie. But oh for the Lords
sake, do not kill our dying souls, by denying these our
necessar desires. There are about twelve or fourteen waste
congregations on this nearest coast: let us have at least a
competent number that may erect Christs throne of discipline,
and may help to bring in others, and then shall we
sing, that the people who were left of the sword, have found
grace in the wildernesse. We have sent these our brethren,
Sir <hi rend='italic'>Robert Adair</hi> of Kinhilt Knight,
and <hi rend='italic'>William Mackenna</hi> of
Bel fast merchant, to attend an answer from you, who have
<pb n="162"/><anchor id="Pg162"/>
attained that happinesse to be lenders and not borrowers,
and to present the heartie longing affections of
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Your most obliged and more expecting
brethren and servants.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Subscribed by very many hands.</hi>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Sess. 6. August 8, 1643.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Acts for subscribing the Covenant.</hi></head>

<p>
The General Assembly considering the good and pious advice
of the Commissioner of the last Assembly, upon
the 22 of September, 1642 <hi rend='italic'>post meridiem</hi>, recommending
to Presbytries, to have Copies of the Covenant to be
subscribed by every Minister at his admission, doth therefore
ratifie and approve the samine. And further ordaines,
that the covenant be reprinted, with this Ordinance prefixed
thereto, and that every Synod, Presbyterie, and
Paroch, have one of them bound in <hi rend='italic'>quarto</hi>, with some
blank paper, whereupon every person may be obliged to
subscribe: And that the Covenants of the Synod and Presbyterie
be keeped by their Moderatours <hi rend='italic'>respectivè</hi> of Universities
by their Principals, of Paroches by their Ministers, with
all carefulnesse. And that particular account of obedience to
this Act, be required hereafter in all visitations of Paroches,
Universities, and Presbyteries, and all trialls of Presbyteries
and Synod books.
</p>

<p>
The General Assembly considering that the Act of the Assembly
at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh 1639. August 30.</hi> injoyning all persons
to subscribe the Covenant, under all Ecclesiastical
censure, hath not been obeyed: Therefore ordaines all
Ministers to make intimation of the said Act in their Kirks,
and thereafter to proceed with the censures of the Kirk against
such as shall refuse to subscribe the Covenant. And
that exact account be taken of every Ministers diligence
<pb n="163"/><anchor id="Pg163"/>
hereintil by their Presbyteries and Synods, as they will answer
to the General Assembly.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Sess. 7. August 9. 1643.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act for searching Books tending to
Separation.</hi></head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly considering the recommendation
of the Commissioners of the late Assembly at
S. <hi rend='italic'>Andrews</hi>, upon the 12 of
<hi rend='italic'>May</hi> last, to every Minister
within their several bounds; especially to Ministers
upon the coasts, or where there is Harbourie and Ports,
to try and search for all books tending to Separation:
And finding the same most necessar, do therefore ordain
that recommendation to have the strength of an ordinary
Act of Assembly: And that every Minister be careful to try
and search if any such books be brought to this Countrey
from beyond seas, and if any shall be found, to present
the samine to Presbyteries, that some course may be taken
to hinder the dispersing thereof: And earnestly recommend
to the Civil Magistrates, to concurre with their authoritie
in all things, for effectual execution hereof.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Approbation of the proceedings of the
Commissioners of the last Assembly.</hi></head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly having heard the report of the
Committee appointed to consider the proceedings of
the Commissioners of the late Assembly at S. <hi rend='italic'>Andrews</hi>;
after mature deliberation, and serious consideration thereof,
findes the whole Acts, Conclusions and Proceedings
of the saids Commissioners, contained in a Book and Register
subscribed by Master <hi rend='italic'>Andrew Ker</hi> their Clerk, and by
Master <hi rend='italic'>David Lindsay</hi> Moderatour, and
Master <hi rend='italic'>James Hamilton</hi>
<pb n="164"/><anchor id="Pg164"/>
Clerk to the said Committe, to declare much wisedome,
diligence, vigilancie, and every way commendable zeal and
fidelitie in doing and discharging every thing according to
their Commission.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Sess. 8. August 10. 1643.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Propositions given by the Commissioners of the Parliament
of England to a Committee, to be presented
by them to the Assembly.</hi></head>

<p>
We the Commissioners appointed by both Houses of the
Parliament of England, desire your Lordships, and
the rest of this reverend Committee, to represent to the reverend
the Generall Assembly of the Church of Scotland,
that we are commanded.
</p>

<p>
To acknowledge with all thankfulnesse to God, their
zeal for purging and reforming Religion, and care not only
to prevent the grouth, but utterly to extirpate the Reliques
of Popery: And also the great blessing of Almighty
God upon their so constant and faithful endeavours, thus
far establishing them in truth and peace, together with their
labour of love, to procure the like happinesse to our Church
and Nation.
</p>

<p>
To give them an account of their earnest desire and endeavour
to see the same Work promoted and perfected among
our selves; which though it hath been opposed and retarded
by the industrious malice of the Popish, Prelaticall, and
malignant partie, yet through Gods goodnesse it hath so far
prevailed, as to produce the removeall of the High Commission,
the making void the coercive power of the Prelates
and their Courts, The ejection of the Bishops from the
House of Peers, the turning out of many scandalous Ministers,
Besides that they have passed and presented to his
Majestie diverse Bills, <hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi> For the suppressing of Innovations,
For the more strict observation of the Lords Day, against
Pluralities and non-residencie, For the punishment of the
<pb n="165"/><anchor id="Pg165"/>
scandalous Clergie, For the abolition of Episcopacie, and
the calling an Assembly: The true Copies of which, we
herewithall deliver. Which Bills, through the underminning
of the Papists, Prelates, and their party (the
constant enemies of Reformation) have not yet obtained
his Majesties Royall assent. And yet considering the urgent
necessity of purging and settling the Church (as hath been
often pressed and presented to the Parliament of England,
by pious and frequent exhortations and Declarations from
that reverent Assembly) they have been constrained by an
Ordinance of both Houses, to call an Assembly of Divines,
and others, now fitting, to consider and prepare
what may conduce thereunto, which by the assistance of
some godly and learned Divines sent from this Nation (as
is earnestly desired) we hope may through the blessing of
God, bring it to perfection.
</p>

<p>
And yet notwithstanding to let them know that by reason
of the prevailing of the Papists, Prelaticall Faction, and other
malignant enemies to this so much desired Reformation,
(all of them being now in arms against the Parliament)
these hopefull beginnings are likely, not onely to be rendred
ineffectuall, but all the former evils, superstitions, and
corruptions (which for the present, through the blessing
of God, are in a good measure removed) to be re-introduced
by strong hand which if once they should take root again
in the Church and Kingdome of England, will quickely
spread their venome &amp; infection into the neighbour Church
and Kingdome of Scotland the quarrell of the enemies of
this Work being not so much against the persons of men,
as the power of Godlinesse, and purity of Gods worship,
wheresoever it is professed. Both Houses do therefore desire
that reverent Assembly to lay seriously to heart the state
and condition of their sister Church and Kingdome, and
not only by their prayers to assist in these straits, but also by
such seasonable and effectuall means as to them shall seem
meet, to further and expedite the present aid and assistance
demanded by both Houses.
</p>

<p>
And lastly, to make known unto them, that we are designed
and sent by both Houses of Parliament to the Generall
<pb n="166"/><anchor id="Pg166"/>
Assembly of the Church of Scotland, to propound to them
and consult with them concerning such things as may conduce
to our own Reformation, and our so much desired
conjunction with this Church, which they have more fully
expressed in a Declaration of their own, which here withall
we present.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>August 10. 1643</hi>,<lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>William Bond,</hi><lb/>
Secr. Commiss.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>A Declaration of the Lords and Commons in
the Parliament of England, to the Generall
Assembly of the Church of
Scotland.</hi></head>

<p>
The Lords and Commons in Parliament acknowledging
with humble thankfulnesse to Almighty God,
the disposer of hearts, the Christian zeal and love
which the Generall Assembly of the Churches of Scotland,
have manifested in their pious endeavours for the preservation
of the true reformed Protestant Religion, from the
subtle practices and attempts of the Popish and Prelaticall
party, to the necessary Reformation of Church discipline
and Government in this Kingdome, and the more near union
of both Churches, do earnestly desire that reverend
Assembly to take notice, that the two Houses of Parliament
fully concurring with them in these pious Intentions; for
the better accomplishment thereof, have called an Assembly
of diverse godly and learned Divines, and others of this
Kingdome, unto the City of Westminster, who are now
sitting and consulting about these matters, And likewise
have nominated and appointed <hi rend='italic'>John</hi> Earle of Ruthland, Sir
<hi rend='italic'>William Armine</hi> Baronet, Sir <hi rend='italic'>Henry Vane</hi>
the younger, Knight, <hi rend='italic'>Thomas Hatcher</hi>, and
<hi rend='italic'>Henry Darley</hi> Esquires. Committees and
Commissioners of both Houses, to the Kingdome and States
of Scotland, who beside their Instructions in matters
<pb n="167"/><anchor id="Pg167"/>
concerning the Peace and Common weal of both Kingdomes,
have received Directions to resort to the General Assembly
of the Church of Scotland, and propound and consult
with them, or any Commissioners deputed by them, in
all occasions which may further the so much desired Reformation
in Ecclesiastical matters in this Church and Kingdome,
and a nearer conjunction betwixt both Churches. In
performance whereof, Master <hi rend='italic'>Stephen Marshal</hi>, and Master
<hi rend='italic'>Philip Nye</hi>, Ministers of Gods Word, and men of approved
faithfulnesse and abilities in their Function, both Members
of this Assembly of Divines here congregated, and
sitting, are appointed to assist and advise the same Committee
in such things as shall concerne this Church. And
the two Houses do hereby recommend the Commitees and
divines afore-mentioned, to the reverend Assembly of the
Church of Scotland, to be by them received with favour,
and credited in those things, which they, or any three, or
more of them shall propound to them.
</p>

<p>
It is likewise desired, that that reverend Assembly will
according to their former promise and resolution, send to
the Assembly here, such number of godly and learned Divines,
as in their wisedome they think most expedient for the
furtherance of this work, which so much concernes the honour
of God, the prosperity and peace of the two Churches
of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Scotland</hi>; and which must needs have a great
influence in procuring more safe and prosperous condition
to other reformed Churches abroad. And that their endeavours
may be more effectual, the two Houses do make this
request to them, with their authority, advice and exhortation,
so far as belongs to them, to stir up that Nation to
send some competent Forces in aid of this Parliament and
Kingdome, against the many Armies of the Popish and Prelatical
party, and their adherents, now in arms for the
ruine and destruction of the reformed Religion, and all the
Professours thereof. In all which they shall do that which
will be pleasing to God, whose cause it is, and likewise
safe and advantageous to their own Church and Kingdome,
who cannot securely enjoy the great blessings of Religion,
Peace, and Libertie in that Kingdome, if this Church and
<pb n="168"/><anchor id="Pg168"/>
Kingdome, by the prevailing violence of that partie, shall
bee brought to ruine and destruction.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Jo. Browne</hi>, Cleric. Parliamentorum.<lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Henr. Elsynge</hi>, Cler. Parliamentorum.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>A Letter from some Brethren of the
Ministerie in the Kirk of</hi> England,
<hi rend='italic'>to the Assembly.</hi></head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Reverend and beloved;</hi>
</p>

<p>
The experience which we have had of your forwardnesse
in receiving, and faithfulnesse in weighing our
former addresses, hath given us abundant encouragement
to take hold upon this present opportunitie of breathing out
something of our sorrowes, which your love and our necessity,
command us to represent to your consideration and
compassion. Much we know we may commit to the wisedome
and fidelity of our Brethren these messengers, to impart
unto you concerning our miserable condition, and unto
them shall leave the most. Your own Nationall, but specially
Christian interest, will not permit you to hide your
eyes from the bleeding condition of your poor distressed
Brethren in England, should neither Letters, nor Messengers
be sent unto you; But Messengers coming, we should at once
neglect our selves, should we not thus a little ease our burdened
hearts, by pouring them out into your bosomes, and
seem ungrateful to you, of whose readinesse to suffer with
us, and do for us, we have had so great &amp; ample testimonies.
</p>

<p>
Surely if ever a poor Nation were upon the edge of a most
desperate precipice, if ever a poor Church were ready to be
swallowed up by Satan and his Instruments, we are that
Nation, we are that Church. And in both respects by so
much the more miserable, by how much, we expected not
a Preservation onely, but an augmentation also, of happinesse
in the one, and glory in the other. We looked for
Peace, but no good came, and for a time of healing, and
behold trouble! Our GOD who in his former Judgements
<pb n="169"/><anchor id="Pg169"/>
was a moth &amp; rottenesse (and yet had of late begun to
send us health and cure) is now turned into a Lion to us:
and threatens to rend the very cawle of our hearts: From
above he hath sent a fire into our bones, and it prevails against
us; From our own bowels he hath called forth, and
strengthened an adversarie against us, a generation of brutish
hellish men, the rod of his anger, and the staff of his
indignation, under whose cruelties we bleed, and if present
mercy step not in, we die. <hi rend='italic'>Righteous art thou, O
LORD, and just are all thy Judgements!</hi> But O the more
then barbarous carriages of our enemies, where ever GOD
gives any of his hidden ones up into their hands, we need
not expresse it unto you, who knows the inveterate and
deadly malice of the Antichristian faction against the Members
of our Lord Jesus. And it is well we need not expresse
it unto you, for in truth we cannot. Your own thoughts
may tell you better then any words of ours, what the mercie
of Papists is, toward the Ministers and Servants of our
Lord Jesus Christ. But the Lord knows we are not troubled
so much with their rage against us, or our own miseries
and dangers; but that which breaks our hearts is, the
danger we behold the Protestant Religion, and all the Reformed
Churches in at this time, through that too great and
formidable strength the Popish Faction is now arrived at. If
our GOD will lay our bodies as the ground, and as the
street under their foot, and poure out our bloud as dust before
their fury, the wil of the Lord be done, might our bloud
be a sacrifice to ransome the rest of the Saints or Church of
Christ from Antichristian fury, we would offer it up upon this
service gladly. But we know their rage is insatiable, and will
not be quenched with our blouds, immortall, and will not
die with us, armed against us, nor as men, but as Christians,
but as Protestants, but as men desiring to reform our
selves, and to draw our selves and others yet nearer unto
God. And if God gave us up to be devoured by this rage,
it will take the more strength and courage (at least) to attempt
the like against all the Protestant and Reformed
Churches. In a deeper sense of this extream danger,
threating us and you, and all the Churches then we can expresse,
<pb n="170"/><anchor id="Pg170"/>
we have made this addresse unto you; in the bowels
of our Lord Jesus Christ, humbly imploring your most
fervent Prayers to the GOD that hears Prayers; who
(should we judge by providences) seems to be angry with
our Prayers (though we trust he doth but seem so, and
though he kill us, yet will we trust in him) Oh, give us
the brotherly aide of your re-inforced tears and payers,
that the blessings of truth and peace which our prayers alone
have not obtained, yours combined, may. And give us
reverend and much honoured in our Lord your advices,
what remains for us further to doe, for the making of our
own and the Kingdomes peace with GOD. We have lien
in the dust before him; we have poured our hearts in humiliation
to him, we have in sincerity, endeavoured to reform
our selves, and no lesse sincerely desired, studied, laboured
the publick Reformation, Neverthelesse the Lord hath
not yet turned himself from the fiercenesse of his anger.
And be pleased to advise us further, what may be the happiest
course for the uniting of the Protestant partie more firmly?
That we may all serve GOD with one consent, and stand
up against Antichrist as one man, that our GOD who now
hides himself from his people may return unto us, delight
in us scatter and subdue his and our enemies, and cause his
face to shine upon us. The Lord prosper you and preserve
us for that the great work of these latter ages may be finished
to his honour, and our own and the Churches happinesse
through Christ Jesus.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Subscribed by very many hands.</hi>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Sess. 9. August 11. 1643.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act against Burials and hinging of Honours, &amp;c.
in Kirks.</hi></head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly considering the great abuse of
burying within Kirks, wherein GODS publick worship
is exercised, notwithstanding diverse Acts of this Kirk,
<pb n="171"/><anchor id="Pg171"/>
prohibiting the same. And that through toleration thereof,
other abuses in hinging of Pensils and Brods, affixing
of Honours and Arms, and such like scandalous Monuments
in the Kirk, hath crept in. Therefore for remedy
hereof, do hereby ratifie and approve the former Acts and
Constitutions made against burials in Kirks. And inhibites
and discharges all persons of whatsoever qualitie, to bury
any deceased person within the body of the Kirk, where
the people meet for hearing of the Word, and administration
of the Sacraments. And inhibites them to hing
Pensils or Brods, to affixe Honours or Arms, or to make
any such like Monuments, to the honour or remembrance
of any deceased person upon walls, or otherplaces within
the Kirk, where the publick worship of God is exercised,
as said is.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Sess. 10. August 12. 1643.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act anent reposition of Ministers, deposed by
Superiour Judicatories.</hi></head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly considering that sentences of
Superiour Judicatories of the Kirk should stand effectuall,
while they be taken away by themselves, and that
they should not be made void and ineffectuall by Inferiour
Judicatories: Therefore discharges all Provinciall Assemblies
to repone any Minister deposed by the Generall Assembly.
And all Presbyteries to repone any Ministers deposed
either by General or Provincial Assemblies; And declares
and ordains, that all such sentences of reposition by
these Inferiour Judicatories <hi rend='italic'>respectivè</hi>,
shall be null in themselves;
And that the sentences of deposition by the Superiour
Judicatories <hi rend='italic'>respectivé</hi> shall stand valid and effectual
notwithstanding thereof.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n="172"/><anchor id="Pg172"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Sess. 11. Aug. 14. 1643.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act against Masters who have Servants that prophane
the Lords day.</hi></head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly declares, that the Acts made
against Salmond fishing upon the Sabbath, or against
any other labour upon the Lords day, to be not only against
servants who actually work: But also that the samine
should be extended against masters, whose hired servants
they are.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Sess. 12. Aug. 15. 1643.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act for preparing the Directorie for the
worship of God</hi>.</head>

<p>
The Assembly considering how convenient it is, that all
the Ministers of the particular Kirks within this Kingdome,
in their administration, keep unity and uniformity
in the substance and right ordering of all the parts of the publick
worship of God, and that all the particular Kirks by
the same unity and uniformity, testifie their unanimous
consent against all schisme and division, unto which these times,
through the working of Satan and his instruments, against
the propagation of the Gospel of peace are so inclinable:
Doth ordain, that a Directorie for divine worship,
with all convenient diligence be framed and made ready in
all the parts thereof, against the next Generall Assembly,
to be held in the year 1644. And for this end that such as
shall be nominate by this Assembly, shall immediatly after
the rising of the Assembly, set themselves apart (so far as
may be) from their particular callings, and with all diligence
and speed, go about this so publick, so pious and so
profitable a work. And when they have brought their endeavours
and labours about this Directorie to an end, that
<pb n="173"/><anchor id="Pg173"/>
it be put into the hands of the Commissioners of the Generall
Assembly, to be revised, and thereafter by them sent in
severall Copies to all the particular Synods to be held in
April and May, that the famine being reported with their
observations, notes, and animadversions to the Generall
Assembly, it may in end, after their full triall and approbation,
by order and authority from them be received, and
practiced by all the Ministers and particular Kirks. And for
preserving of peace and brotherly unity, in the mean while,
till the Directorie by universall consent of the whole Kirk
be framed, finished, and concluded, The Assembly forbiddeth
under the pain of the censures of the Kirk, all disputation
by word or writing, in private or publick, about
different practices in such things, as have not been formerly
determined by this Kirk, And all condemning one of another
in such lawfull things as have been universally received,
and by perpetuall custome practised by the most faithfull
Ministers of the Gospell, and opposers of corruptions
in this Kirk, since the first beginning of Reformation to
these times. And doth exhort and command that all
endeavour to keep the unity of the spirit, in the bond
of peace, that all beginnings of Separation, all scandall and
division, be by all means avoided; And that against envying,
and strife, and faction, and glorying in men, every
one go before another in the duties of love, and so fulfill the
Law of Christ; That continuing in one spirit and one minde,
&amp; fighting together through the faith of the Gospel, we may
mutually aide, strengthen and comfort one another in all
Pastorall and Christian emploiments, better resist the common
adversaries, edifie one another in the knowledge and
fear of God, and the more acceptably, and with the greater
blessing serve the Lord who hath done so great things
for us.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="174"/><anchor id="Pg174"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Propositions from the English Commissioners
presented this day to the Assembly.</hi></head>

<p>
We the Commissioners appointed by both Houses of the
Parliament of England, being commanded by them
(as we have already declared) to desire the reverend Assembly
of Scotland, seriously to lay to heart the present Estate
of their Sister Church and Kingdome of England, and not
onely to assist with their Prayers in their straits, but also by
such reasonable and effectuall means as to themselves shall
seem meet to further and expedite the assistance now desired
by both Houses from the Kingdome of Scotland, and a
more strict union with them, Have thought fit in Pursuance
of the commands received from both Houses of Parliament,
to communicate to this Assembly the paper which to this purpose
we have lately delivered to the Honourable Convention
of Estates, in this Kingdome, that so this reverend
Assembly might be the better enabled, to contribute their
best assistance toward the furthering and expediting of the
same. Wherein we assure our selves of their ready and willing
affections, considering the great service they may do
to God, and the great honour may redound to themselves
in becoming the Instruments of a glorious Reformation,
not onely through this Iland, but from thence possibly to be
spread to other Churches now oppressed under the Antichristian
bondage, and tyrannie of the Popish and prelatical
Faction. We will not say there lies any obligation upon
this Church and Kingdome, to comply with the desires of
the two Houses of Parliament; though we might call to
minde that God by the hand of the Church and Kingdome
of England, did once reach forth assistance and aid unto
this Nation, and hath since used them as a help to that blessed
Reformation it now enjoyes. And who knoweth
whether the wise providence of God hath not suffered this
Church and Kingdome to be tempted thereby, to make
them the more feasible of the present miseries of their brethren,
and likewise given them a good issue, with the tentation,
<pb n="175"/><anchor id="Pg175"/>
that they might be made a means of our deliverance?
We shall not need to offer any grounds of prudence
to invite them hereunto, who have already prevented us in
the acknowledgement of what might be said of that kinde
in the advice presented by the Commissioners of the General
Assembly. July 6. 1643. unto the Convention of Estates,
expressing as one remedie of the present dangers of this
Church and Kingdome, their earnest desire of renewing the
league and association with England, for the defence of
Religion against the common enemie, and of further extending
the same against Prelacie, and Popish Ceremonies,
for Uniformity in externall worship and Church-government.
And we hope that the same God who hath put
these desires into the hearts of both Kingdomes, will make
use of this present opportunity to knit them both to himself,
and each other in a most strict and durable Union,
and thereby the more firmly to establish truth and peace in
both Nations. Howsoever this which we have done in
discharge of our duty, will afford the comfort of a good
conscience in our greatest distresses, and give us ground to
expect deliverance some way or other from the manifold
wisedome and power of God, who though men and means
fail, will not cast off his people, nor forsake his inheritance.
We have onely this to adde further, that we are
commanded by both Houses to let this reverend Assembly
know that it is their earnest desire, that what other Propositions
may be thought fit to be added and concluded by this
Assembly, whereby the assistance and Union betwixt the
two Nations, may be made more beneficiall and effectuall
for the securing of Religion and Libertie, should be offered
to us, and taken to our speedy consideration,
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>August</hi> 15. 1643.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>William Bond.</hi> Secr. Com.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="176"/><anchor id="Pg176"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>The Paper before-mentioned, delivered
August 12. to the Convention, and this day
to the Assembly</hi></head>

<p>
We the Commissioners appointed by both Houses of the
Parliament of England, are by our instructions commanded
to put their brethren of Scotland in minde, that
the Popish and prelaticall Faction that began with them,
about the year 1638. and 1639. and then intended to make
way to the ruine of the Kingdome of England by theirs,
have not abated any part of their malice toward the Nation
and Church of Scotland, nor are at all departed from their
designe of corrupting and altering Religion through the
whole Iland, though they have inverted the manner of
their proceeding, conceiving now that they have an easier
way to destroy them, if they may first prevail over the Parliament
and Kingdome of England. In which respect it is
the desire of both Houses, that the two Nations may be
strictly united, for their mutuall defence against the Papists
and prelaticall Faction, and their adherents in both Kingdomes,
and not to lay down arms till those their implacable
enemies shall be dis-armed, and subjected to the authority
and justice of Parliament in both Kingdomes respectively.
And as an effectual mean hereunto, they desire their
brethren of Scotland to raise a considerable force of Horse
and Foot, for their aide and assistance, to be forthwith
sent against the Papists, prelatical Faction, and malignants
now in arms in the Kingdome of England.
</p>

<p>
And for the better encouragement of the Kingdome of
Scotland to this necessary and so much desired Union, we
are by both Houses of Parliament authorized to assure their
brethren, that if they shall be annoyed or endangered by any
Force or Army, either from England or any other place,
the Lords and Commons of England will assist them with a
proportionable strength of Horse and Foot, to what their
Brethren shall now affoord them to be sent into Scotland
for the defence of that Kingdome. And they will maintain
<pb n="177"/><anchor id="Pg177"/>
a guard of Ships at their own charge upon the coast of
Scotland for the securing of that Kingdome, from the invasion
of Irish Rebels or other enemies, during such time
as the Scotish Army shall be employed in the defence of the
Kingdome of England, And to the end that nothing might
be wanting in the Parliament and Kingdome of England to
facilitate this work (wherein the true reformed Religion,
not onely in these two Kingdomes, but throughout all Europe
is so highly concerned) We are farther authorized to
consider with their brethren the Estates and Kingdome of
Scotland, of what other Articles or propositions are fit to
be added and concluded, whereby this assistance and Union
betwixt the two Nations, may be made more beneficial
and effectual for the security of Religion and Libertie in
both Kingdomes.
</p>

<p>
All which being taken into the serious and Christian consideration
of the right honourable the Lords and others of
the Convention of the Estates of Scotland, we hope there
will not need many arguments to perswade and excite them
to give their consent, and that with all convenient speed,
to these desires of both houses of the Parliament of England;
seeing now they have so fully declared, as by what
they have done already, so by what they are yet desirous to
do, that the true state of this cause and quarrel is Religion,
in the Reformation whereof they are, and have been so
forward and zealous, as that there is not any thing expressed
unto them by their brethren of Scotland, in their former or
latter Declarations, which they have not seriously taken
to heart, and seriously endeavoured to effect, (notwithstanding
the subtle malicious and industrious oppositions)
that so the two Kingdomes might be brought into a near
conjunction in one form of Church-government, one directorie
of worship, one Catechisme, &amp;c. and the foundation
laid of the utter extirpation of Popery and prelacie out
of both Kingdomes. The most ready and effectual means
whereunto, is now conceived to be, that both Nations enter
into a strict Union and league, according to the desires of
the two Houses of Parliament.
</p>

<p>
And to induce the perswasion of this (if there were cause)
<pb n="178"/><anchor id="Pg178"/>
we might observe, that, in the many Declarations made by
the General Assembly or States of Scotland, to their Brethren
of England, there have been sundry expressions, manifesting
the great necessitie that both Kingdomes for the securitie
of their Religion and Liberties, should joyn in this
strict Union against the Papists, Prelats, and their adherents:
As also in the endeavour of a near conjunction between the
Churches of both Nations. The apprehension and foresight
of which, hath caused the Popish and Prelatical Faction in
forreigne parts as well as in his Majesties Dominions, strictly
and powerfully to combine themselves to the hinderance
of this so necessary Work, and the universal suppression of
the true protestant Religion in Europe: A course not much
different from that which they took in the year 1585. when
the wisedome and zeal of this Nation to counter-myne so
wicked a conspiracie, and from the due sense of the mutual
interest of these two Kingdomes in Religion and Libertie,
found a necessity of entring into a league of this nature, as
well considering, that thereby no lesse safetie might be expected
to both Nations, then danger by forbearing the same.
And though we doubt not but in so necessary and so good a
Work, many difficulties may arise to interrupt and retard the
same; yet we are as confident, that the heartie and brotherly
affection of this Nation to the Parliament and Kingdome
of England, will easily break through them; and the rather
because in the like cases of difficultie and danger, not only
at the time of the league above-mentioned, but before, and
likewise since, when any opportunity hath offered it self
particularly, during the sitting of this present Parliament, the
Kingdome of England hath been very forward and ready to
lay to heart the dangers of the Kingdome of Scotland as their
own, and to decline no means within the reach of their power
for the redresse or prevention of the same.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>August</hi> 12. 1643.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>William Bond</hi> Secr. Com.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n="179"/><anchor id="Pg179"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Sess. 13. Aug. 16. 1643.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Recommendation to the Presbyteries and Universities
anent Students that have the
Irish language.</hi></head>

<p>
The Assembly considering the lamentable condition of
the people in the Highlands, where there are many that
gets not the benefite of the Word in respect there are very
few Preachers that can speak the Irish language, Do for remeid
thereof think good, that young Students who have
the Irish tongue, be trained up at Colledges in Letters,
especially in the studies of Divinitie, And to this effect
recommend to Presbyteries and Universities to preferre
any hopefull Students that have the language aforesaid, to
Bursaries, that they by their studies in processe of time attaining
to knowledge, and being enabled for the Ministerie,
may be sent forth for preaching the Gospel in these Highland
parts, as occasions shall require.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Sess. 14. August 17. 1643.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>The Letter from the Assembly of Divines in
the Kingdome of England.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>To the right reverend the Generall Assembly
of the Church of Scotland.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Right reverend and dearly beloved in our Lord Jesus Christ,</hi>
</p>

<p>
We the Assembly of Divines and others, called and
now sitting by authority of both Houses of Parliament,
to be consulted by them in matters of Religion;
have received from the honourable Houses of Commons, a
speciall order (dated the 3. of this instant August) recommending
it to us to write a Letter to the Generall Assembly
of the Church of Scotland, taking notice of the pious and
good expeditions to this Church and State, certified in the
<pb n="180"/><anchor id="Pg180"/>
late Answer of the Commissioners of the Generall Assembly
of the Kirk of Scotland, from their meeting at Edinburgh
the 17. of July 1643. And further to desire them to possesse
the people of that Kingdome with our condition, and to
encourage them to our assistance in this cause of Religion.
And having with that order received and read the said Answer
directed to the honourable Houses of the Parliament of
England, we cannot sufficiently expresse the great content
and comfort, unto which it hath raised us in the midst of the
sad and calamitous condition under which we lie.
</p>

<p>
It is no small refreshing to our mourning spirits to finde,
that yet our God hath not left us wholly comfortlesse, nor
cast us so far out of his sight, as having made us sick with
smiting that should be verified of us, <hi rend='italic'>Lover and friend hast
thou put far from us</hi>, and that no man should turn aside to ask
how we do: but that we finde so many of the Churches of
Christ, and above them all, our dearest Brethren of Scotland,
so far to take to heart our extremities, as to sit in the
dust with us, and so to look upon our adversities, as being
themselves also in the body.
</p>

<p>
And as we cannot render thanks sufficient unto our God
for remembring such mercie in the midst of so much
wrath; so we embrace with all chearfulnesse this opportunitie
of thankfull acknowledgement of the great
debt which your love doth continually lay upon, not us
alone, but upon this whole Kingdome, in the free and
full expressions of your care, piety and zeal, and of
like affections of that whole Nation, to assist and concurre
with the Parliament here, by all good and lawfull means,
for sending of Religion in godly unity and uniformitie
throughout all his Majesties Dominions, against all the
designes, power and malice of bloudie Papists, and
the Prelaticall Faction, with all their malignant adherents,
the common enemies of Reformation, truth and
peace.
</p>

<p>
We are likewise much ingadged to the great vigilancie
and travels of the honourable Convention of the Estates of
Scotland, in contributing their brotherly advice, and for
<pb n="181"/><anchor id="Pg181"/>
their readinesse to give assistance for recovering and settling
the peace of this Kingdome, against the devices, power and
practices of the enemies of Religion, and the publick
Good, whereof some hints are given in that Answer and
of which we doubt not but the honourable Houses or Parliament
will be so sensible as to give such a return as becomes
them: for they, better knowing then we do, the depth
of the evils under which this Nation now groaneth, and the
further dangers imminent, will be more able to value and
improve the great affection and wisedome of their Brethren,
in points of so high and generall concernement, for the safetie
and glory of the Kings Majestie, and of all his Kingdomes,
and are more fit to take notice of advices of that
kinde, in reference to the civil State, which therefore we
wholly leave with them.
</p>

<p>
But as for the many prudent, pious, and reosonable admonitions
which concerne our Assembly, the good Lord reward
(for we cannot) seven fold into your bosomes all the
good, which you have laboured to procure unto the
House of our GOD, and blessed be his Name who hath
put such a thing as this into the hearts of our Parliament,
to cleanse the House of the Lord of all the uncleannesse
that is in it, by impure Doctrine, Worship, or Discipline.
</p>

<p>
Nor can we in the depth of all our sufferings and sorrows,
withhold our hearts from rejoycing in the wonderful goodnes
of God toward this Kingdome, in that he hath let us see
the gracious fruit of your effectuall prayers and teares, as
well as of our own endeavours this way: In bringing together
this Assembly, although in a very troublous time,
whereby we may have better opportunity more fully to
poure out our soules jointly and together to our GOD,
for healing of this now miserable Church and Nation:
To consider throughly, for what more especially the Land
mourneth, and how we may be most usefull to our great GOD
and Master JESUS CHRIST; In contributing
somewhat to the vindicating of his precious truth, many
wayes corrupted through the craft of men that have lyen in
<pb n="182"/><anchor id="Pg182"/>
wait to deceive: In the seeking out of a right way of worshipping
our GOD according to his own heart: In promoting
the power of Godlinesse: in the hearts and lives of
all his people, and in laying forth such a Discipline as may
be most agreeable to Gods holy Word, and most apt to procure
and preserve the peace of this Church at home, and
nearer agreement with the Church of Scotland (highly honoured
by us) and other the best reformed Churches abroad,
That so to the utmost of our power, we may exalt him that
is the only Lord over the Church, his own House, in all
his Offices, and present this Church as a chast virgin unto
Christ.
</p>

<p>
It is a timely and savourie prayer which you have put up
at the throne of Grace, touching the due managing of the
proceedings in this Assembly, and that with straigth intentions
we may all seek the truth in every thing, which by the
blessing of God upon our labours, must needs produce all
those blessings which your worthie Commissioners mention.
And now, for your comfort as well as our own encouragement,
we desire you to take notice of the gracious
answer of the God that heareth prayer, unto your fervent
cryes. For beside our own particular addresses and secret
vows to our God to be faithful (with disdain of all baits of
avarice and ambition) it hath pleased the Divine Providence
so to direct both the honourable Houses of Parliament, to
take care of preventing all obliquitie in our proceedings,
and to stop the mouthes of all that watch for their and our
haltings, and are apt maliciously to traduce both, (as if
we were so restrained by them, in our votes and resolutions,
as to be bound up to the sense of others, and to carry
on private designes in a servile way) that the Houses have
tendered to us, and we have most readily taken a solemne
and serious Protestation in the presence of Almighty God,
to maintain nothing in this Assembly touching Doctrine,
but what we are perswaded in our consciences to be the
truth; nor in matters of Discipline, but what we conceive
to conduce most to the glory of God, and the good
and peace of his Church; which doth not only secure the
<pb n="183"/><anchor id="Pg183"/>
Members against fettering of their judgements or votes,
but engage them to the use of all freedome, becoming the
integrity of conscience, the weight of the Cause, the gravitie
and honour of such an Assembly. It is likewise a
great consolation, that our GOD hath put it into your
hearts to designe some godly and learned Brethren to put in
their sickles with us into this Harvest, which is so great,
and requires so many Labourers; for which, as we heartily
return thanks, so we earnestly pray the Lord to open a way
to their timely coming hitherto and do assure them of all testimonies
of respect, love, and the right hand of fellowship,
who shall under-take a journey so tedious, and now
so perillous, to joyne with us in the Work, when it shall
please the honourable Houses of Parliament to invite them
thereunto.
</p>

<p>
It remaines that we should now spread before you our calamities,
dangers and fears of further evils, not only drawing
toward us, but even threatning you also; and crave
your passionate aids in all wayes becoming the Servants of
Jesus Christ. But your Commissioners have so fully declared
your certain knowledge and deep sense of them, that
they have left us no room for inlarging ourselves in this
particular, to Brethren so full of bowels and zeal. And
they have sufficiently intimated unto the honourable Houses,
that you are well aware how often the common enemies
of both Kingdomes have consulted together with one
consent to cut off both the one and the other from being a
Nation, and that the Tabernacles of <hi rend='italic'>Edom</hi>,
and the <hi rend='italic'>Ishmaelites</hi> of <hi rend='italic'>Moab</hi>,
and the <hi rend='italic'>Hagarens, Geball, Ammon,</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Amalek</hi>, the cursed Papists, and their implacable and bloudy
Abettors here, do still retain the same malice, and carry
on the same designe against Religion, and perfect Reformation
even in your Kingdome, happily rescued from
their former tyrannies, as well as in this of scorched England,
now in the furnace: Only they have varied the
Scene, pouring out all their fury upon us at the present:
That so, having once troden us under as mire in the streets,
they may afterward more easily; (which God avert) set
their proud and impure feet upon your necks also. Wherefore
<pb n="184"/><anchor id="Pg184"/>
the good leave and favour of the honourable Houses
of Parliament, we shall now spare the further exciting
of you to that which we doubt not of your forwardnesse by
all lawfull and meet means to promote with all your might;
namely, the possessing the good people of that Kingdome;
(of whose willing minde and readinesse you have already
given ample testimony) touching our condition, and to
encourage them to our assistance in this Cause of Religion.
</p>

<p>
And now remembring without ceasing your work of
faith, and labour of love, and patience of hope in our Lord
Jesus Christ, with all due acknowledgments of the precious
effects of your prayers; We most humbly and earnestly desire,
that the same breathings of the spirit in you may still
continue, and (if possible) more frequently and fervently
ascend to your God, and our God, not only for removall
of outward pressures, and the visitation of the sword, that
hath already learned to eat much of our flesh, but also for
the special assistance and protection of the Father of lights,
in this great Work unto which we are now called, and wherein
we already finde many and potent adversaries: that
seeing the plummet is now in the hands of our <hi rend='italic'>Zerubbabels</hi>,
all mountaines may become plains, and they may bring
forth <hi rend='italic'>the capstone of the Lords House with shoutings, crying, Grace,
grace unto it</hi>: and that how weak and contemptible builders
soever we be, the Lord would enable us to build with
them, that none may have cause to despise the day of our
small beginnings, nor to stop our progresse in the work
which he hath given us to do, And as for us, who cannot
but take notice of the extraordinary employments unto which
you are called in your great Assembly, now also sitting:
God forbid that we should sin against the Lord, in ceasing
to pray for you, that the Lord may enable you to be wise
masterbuilders, preserve your peace alwayes by all means,
and make you stedfast, unmoveable, alwayes abounding in
the work of the Lord, to the praise of the glory of his grace,
and to the further benefit and comfort of the whole Church
of God, but more especially of this our afflicted Ark, now
wafted into the midst of a sea of miseries, and tossed with
tempests, untill our wise and gracious God, by the furtherance
<pb n="185"/><anchor id="Pg185"/>
of your prayers and brotherly endeavours, shall cause
it to rest upon the mountains of <hi rend='italic'>Ararat</hi>, which may take away
our fears, as well as put an end to our present sufferings
and give you to rejoyce with us, that now mourn for
us.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Westminster, August 4. 1643.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Subscribed by your most loving Brethren, highly prisyng the
graces of God in you, and that are your Servants for Jesus
sake, in the name of the whole Assembly.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>William Tuisse</hi>, Prelocutor.<lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>John White</hi>, Assessor.<lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Cornelius Burges</hi>, Scribe of the Assembly.<lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Henry Roborough</hi>, Scribe of the Assembly.<lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Adonirum Byfield</hi>, Scribe of the Assembly.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>The Result of the Debates and Consultations of
the Committees of the Convention of Estates and
General Assembly, appointed to meet
with the Commissioners of the Parliament
of England.</hi></head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>August</hi> 17. 1643.
</p>

<p>
The Committees of the Convention of Estates of Scotland,
and of the General Assembly, being appointed to
meet with the Commissioners of the two Houses of the
Parliament of England, upon the Papers delivered in by
the said Commissioners, unto the Convention of Estates,
and unto the General Assembly, upon the 12. and 15, of this
instant 1643. Concerning the desires of both Houses, for
a near and strict Union to be entered into by the two Kingdomes.
And it being declared at the said meeting, with
what sensible affections the General Assembly and Convention,
did receive the desires above-mentioned: And how
beneficial it would be for the more firme settlement of the
<pb n="186"/><anchor id="Pg186"/>
said union, that a Covenant should be entred into by both
Nations: And this forme thereof being by all the foresaid
persons taken into most serious debate and consideration,
and agreed unto: It was thereupon resolved by them, that
it should be presented to the General Assembly, to the Convention
of Estates of Scotland, and to the two Houses of
the Parliament of England, by their respective Committees
and Commissioners, that it might with all speed receive
their respective resolutions.
</p>

<p>
Subscribed
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Ja. Primerose.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>A. Ker.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>William Bond</hi> Sec. Com.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The League and Covenant above-mentioned, being
sent with the Commissioners of this Assembly, to
the Parliament of England, and Assembly of
Divines in that Kingdome, to be received and
approven there, is to be printed at the return
thereof.</hi>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Approbation of the League and Covenant
above mentioned.</hi></head>

<p>
The Assembly having recommended unto a Committee,
appointed by them to joyne with the Committee of the
Honourable Convention of Estates, and the Commissioners
of the Honourable Houses of the Parliament of England,
for bringing the Kingdomes to a more near conjunction
and Union, received from the aforesaid Committees, the
Covenant above mentioned, as the result of their consultations:
And having taken the same, as a matter of so publick
concernment, and of so deep importance doth require,
unto their gravest consideration, Did with all their hearts,
<pb n="187"/><anchor id="Pg187"/>
and with the beginnings of the feelings of that joy which
they did finde in so great measure upon the renovation of
the National Covenant of this Kirk and Kingdome, All
with one voice approve and embrace the same, as the most
powerfull meane, by the blessing of GOD, for settling
and preserving the true Protestant Religion, with perfect
Peace in his Majesties Dominions, and propagating the
same to other Nations, and for establishing his Majesties
throne to all ages and generations. And therefore with their
best affections recommend the same to the Honourable
Convention of Estates, that being examined and approved
by them, it may be sent with all diligence to the Kingdome
of England: that being received and approven there, the
same may be with publick humiliation, and all Religious
and answerable solemnitie, sworn and subscribed by all true
Professours of the reformed Religion, and all his Majesties
good Subjects in both Kingdomes.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Sess. Ult. August 19. 1643.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>The Assemblies humble desires to his Majestie anent the
Lists for Presentations: With a Recommendation
to Presbyteries.</hi></head>

<p>
The Assembly considering the difficultie of obtaining
six able and well qualified Persons to be put into a List
to his Majestie, for every vaiking Kirk at his Majesties Presentation:
Therefore do most earnestly recommend to
his Majesties Commissioner, to represent their humble desires
to his Majestie, that he would be pleased to accept of
a List of three: As also conform to the desire of the last
Assembly at S. Andrews, that his Majestie would be pleased
to accept of any one qualified man, who shall be able to
speak the Irish Language for Kirks vaiking in the Highlands:
Which the Commissioners Grace promised to do with the
first conveniencie.
</p>

<p>
And with all his Grace representing to the Assembly, that
<pb n="188"/><anchor id="Pg188"/>
he conceived his Majestie had already done more, and yet
would do more for satisfaction to the desires of this Kirk,
anent Patronages, nor any other Patron: And therefore
that it were convenient that all other Patrons were earnestly
desired to follow his Majesties example; And the Assembly
thinking it very necessary that some General course were
set down for providing and planning of vaiking Kirks,
whereby all occasions of contests and differences amongst
Patrons, Presbyteries, and Paroches may be removed, Therefore
the Assembly recommend to every Presbyterie, to consult
and advise upon the best wayes and means for effectuating
hereof, And to report the results of their consultations
herein till to the next Assembly.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Overtures anent Witch-craft, and
Charming, &amp;c.</hi></head>

<p>
The abundance and increase of the sin of Witch-craft,
in all the sorts and degrees of it in this time of Reformation,
is to be taken to heart by this reverend Assembly,
who would to that end consider.
</p>

<p>
I. Of the occasions thereof, which are found to be these
especially, extremity of grief, malice, passion, and desire
of revenge, pinching povertie, solicitation of other
Witches and Charmers; for in such eases the devill assails
them, offers aide, and much prevails.
</p>

<p>
II. Of the reasons and causes of Satans prevailing;
which are grosse ignorance, infidelitie, want of the love
of the truth (which GOD hath made so long and clearly to
shine in our Land) and profanesse of life.
</p>

<p>
III. Of the means and wayes to bring them to a confession
and censure, which we conceive to be, that a standing
Commission for a certain time be had from the Lords
of Secret Councel, or Justice Generall, to some understanding
Gentlemen and Magistrates within the bounds of
Presbyteries that shall crave it, giving them power to apprehend,
try, and execute justice against such personares
<pb n="189"/><anchor id="Pg189"/>
are guilty of Witch-craft within these Presbyteries; For
many Paroches want the concurrence of civill Magistrates.
</p>

<p>
IV. Of the grounds of apprehending them, Which
may be a reigning brute of Witch craft, backed with dilations
of confessing Witches, being confronted with them;
for it is found that the dilations of two or three confessing
Witches, hath ordinarily proved true: Also depositions
of honest persons, anent malefices committed,
or cures used by them, may be a ground of apprehending
them.
</p>

<p>
V. Being apprehended, there would be honest and discreet
persons appointed to watch them; for being left alone
they are in danger to be suborned and heardened by others,
or of destroying themselves.
</p>

<p>
VI. Ministers would be careful at all times, especially
Morning and Evening, to deal with them, by Prayer and
Conference, whiles they are in prison or restraint.
</p>

<p>
VII. The means to prevent the grouth of this wickednesse,
are:
</p>

<p>
That Ministers be every way careful and painful in warning
people of the danger thereof, and of Satans temptations,
both privately and publickly, and to instruct them in
the knowledge of the Gospell, and grounds of Religion,
by plain cathechesing, to urge lively faith in Christ, which
faith Witches bestow otherwise; Also to presse holinesse of
life, and fervent prayes in private, and in Families, and
in publick, that they be not led into temptation; And to
use the censures of the Kirk against profane persons, such as
Cursers, Whoores, Drunkards, and such like, for over
such like, he gets great advantage. Finally, it is requisite
for preventing of this hainous sin, that people seek knowledge
studie to beleeve, walk in holinesse, and continue
constant and instant in prayer.
</p>

<p>
And because Charming is a sort and degree of Witch-craft,
and too ordinary in the Land; It would be injoyned
to all Ministers to take particular notice of them, to
search them out, and such as consult with them, and that the
Elders carefully concurre in such search; And this Assembly
would think on an uniforme way of censuring these
<pb n="190"/><anchor id="Pg190"/>
Charmers, and such as employ them, or consult with them,
<hi rend='italic'>primo quoque tempore</hi>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Assembly approves the articles and Overtures aforesaid, And
ordaines every Presbyterie to take to their further consideration
by what other wayes or means, the sins aforesaid of Witch craft,
Charming, and consulting with Witches, or Charmers, &amp;
such like wickednes, may be tried, restrained, and condignely
censured and punished ecclesiastically and civilly: And
to report their judgementt herein to the next Assembly.</hi>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Commission for Ministers to go to</hi>
Ireland.</head>

<p>
The General Assembly having received a Petition subscribed
by a very great number in the North of Ireland,
intimating their deplorable condition through
want of the Ministery of the Gospel, occasioned by the tyrannie
of the Prelats, and the sword of the Rebels,
and desiring some Ministers, especially such as had been
chased from them by the persecution of the Prelats, and
some others to be added, either to be sent presently over
to reside among them, or declared transportable,
that upon invitation from them, they might go and
settle there: Together with a Letter from the Vicount of
Airds to that same effect. All which the Assembly hath
taken to their serious consideration, being most heartily
willing to sympathize with every Member of Christ his
body, although never so remote, much more with that
plantation there, which for the most part was a branch
of the Lord his vine, planted in this Land. In which
solicitude, as they would be loath to usurpe without
their own bounds, or stretch themselves beyond their
own measure, so they dare not be wanting to the inlargement
of Christs Kingdome, where so loud a cry of so extreme
necessity, could not but stir up the bowels of Christian
compassion. And although they conceive, that the
present unsettled condition both of Church and State in that
Land, will not suffer them (as yet) to loose any, to make
any constant abode there; yet they have resolved to send over
some for the present exigent, till the next general Assembly,
<pb n="191"/><anchor id="Pg191"/>
by courses, to stay three moneth allanerly. And
therefore do hereby authorize and give Commission to the
persons following, to wit, Master <hi rend='italic'>William Cockburne</hi> Minister
at Kirkmichell, and Master <hi rend='italic'>Matthew Mackaill</hi> minister
at Carmanoch, for the first three moneths, beginning upon
the 8. of September next. Master <hi rend='italic'>George Hatchison</hi> Minister
at Calmonell, and Master <hi rend='italic'>Hugh Henderson</hi> Minister at Darly,
for the next three moneths, beginning the 8. of December. Master
<hi rend='italic'>William Adair</hi> Minister at Air, and Master <hi rend='italic'>John
Weir</hi> Minister at Dalserfe, for the third three moneths, beginning
the 8. of March, 1644. And Master <hi rend='italic'>James Hamilton</hi>
Minister at Drumfreis, and Master <hi rend='italic'>John Macclellane</hi> Minister
at Kirkubright for the last three montths, beginning
the 8. of June, the said year 1644. To repair unto the
North of Ireland, and there to visit, instruct, comfort, and
encourage the scattered flocks of Christ. To employ themselves
to their uttermost with all faithfulnesse and singlenesse
of heart in planting and watering, according to the
direction of Jesus Christ, and according to the Doctrine
and Discipline of this Kirk in all things. And if need be
(with the concurrence of such of the Ministers as are there)
to try and ordain such as shall be found qualified for the Ministery;
Giving charge unto the persons foresaids in the
sight of God, that in Doctrine, in Worship, in Discipline,
and in their daily conversation, they study to approve
themselves as the Ministers of Jesus Christ; And that
they be countable to the Gener. Ass. of this Kirk in all things.
And in case of any of the above-mentioned Ministers be impeded
by sicknes, or otherwayes necessarily detained from
this service; The Assembly ordains the Commissioners residing
at Edinb. for the publick affairs of the Kirk, to nominate
in their place well qualified men, who hereby are authorized
to underrake the forefaid imployment, as if they had been
expresly nominate in the face of the Assemb. And this although
possibly it shall not fully satisfie the large expectation of
their Brethren in Ireland: yet the Assembly is confident
they will take in good part at this time that which is judged
most convenient for the present condition, even a mite out
of their own, not very great plentie to supply the present
<pb n="192"/><anchor id="Pg192"/>
necessity: Requiring of them no other recompence, but that
they in all chearfulnesse may embrace and make use of the
Message of Salvation, and promising to inlargre their indebted
bountie at the next Assembly, as they shall finde the
Work of the Lord there to require, in the mean while
wishing that these who are sent, may come with the full
blessing of the Gospel of peace, recommends them, their labours,
and these to whom they are sent, to the rich blessing
of the great Sheepherd of the flock.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act against Ministers haunting with excommunicate
persons.</hi></head>

<p>
If any Minister haunt the company of an excommunicate
person, contrair to the Lawes of this Kirk; The said Minister
for the first fault shall be suspended from his Ministerie
by his Presbyterie, during their pleasure: And for the
second fault be deprived. And in case the Presbyteries be
negligent herein, the Provincial Assembly shall censure the
Presbyterie thus negligent.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act anent an order for using civil Execution
against Excommunicate Persons.</hi></head>

<p>
The Assembly taking to their consideration an Article,
in the Heads and Propositions sent to the Assembly
held at Edinburgh, in August, 1573. by the Lord Regents
Grace, and allowed by that Assembly: Whereof the
tenour followes. <hi rend='italic'>It is resolved that the Executions of the
sentence of Excommunication against Persons excommunicate; after
the space of fourtie dayes past, shall be presented to the Lord Thesaurer
or his Clerk, who thereupon shall raise Letters by deliverance
of the Lords of Session, to charge the Persons Excommunicate, to
satisfie the Kirk and obtain themselves absolved under the pain of
Rebellion: And in case they passe to the Horne, to cause their
<pb n="193"/><anchor id="Pg193"/>
Escheits be taken up; and also to raise and cause execute Letters of
Caption against them; And these to be done at the Kings Majesties
charges</hi>: Do ratifie and approve the said Article, And
farther that the intention of the said Article may be the better
effectuate, doth also ordain, that every Presbyterie
cause send to the Procurator, or Agent of the Kirk, the
foresaid Execution, that is, an minute or note of the sentences
of Excommunication within their bounds, bearing
the time and cause thereof: And that under the hands of the
Moderatour or Clerk of the Presbyterie, or of the Minister
who pronounced the sentence; That the samine may
be delivered to his Majesties Thesaurer, Advocate, or Agent.
To cause Letters of Horning and Caption be raised
and execute, and other diligence to be used against the Excommunicat
Persons in manner foresaid. And that all other
civil action and diligence may be used against them, warranted
and provided by Acts of Parliament, or secret Counsel
made thereanent: And that particular account be craved
hereof in every General Assembly.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>TO THE KINGS MOST
EXCELLENT MAJESTIE,</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The humble Answer of the National Assembly
of the Kirk of Scotland.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Although the many and ample testimonies of Your Majesties
Royal favour and bountie towards this Kirk and
Kingdome be living and lasting Monuments to hold all Your
Majesties good Subjects and us most of all, in remembrance
of that duty, which we owe to Your Majestie our great
Benefactour, never by any length of time to be deleted out
of our minds: Yet when we remember even of conscience
we owe honour and subjection unto Your Majestie
as our dread Soveraigne, as well in Your Majesties absence
as presence, We finde our obligation to be Religious, and
<pb n="194"/><anchor id="Pg194"/>
thereby much increased: And therefore have we at this
time in all our consultations and conclusions, of which some
have been of more then ordinary weight and concernment,
in answer to certain Propositions, made unto us by the
Commissioners of the Houses of Parliament of Your Majesties
Kingdome of England, and some Reverend Divines
assisting them, fixed our eyes and thoughts upon Your Majesties
honour and happinesse, with no other and with no
lesse intention, then if we had been honoured by Your
Majesties Royal Person in our Assembly. And in like
manner have given such Instructions to some Ministers and
others, to be sent unto the Assembly of Divines now in
England, as next unto the honour of God, and the good
of Religion, may most serve for Your Majesties preservation,
and the peace of Your Kingdomes: Concerning
which, the Commissioners of the last General Assembly have
so fully exprest their humble thoughts and desires in their
Supplication and Remonstrance sent unto Your Majestie,
that we need not adde any thing, and Your Majesties times
and affairs forbid all repetition. We do onely in all humilitie
beseech Your Majestie to judge of us and our proceedings,
by the nature and necessity of our vocation, and the rules
prescribed in the word of God for our direction, and not by
uncertain rumours, and ungrounded reports of such men
as have not the fear of God before their eyes. And do earnestly
pray to God Almighty, in whose hands are the hearts
of Kings, to incline Your Majesties heart to the counsels
of truth and peace, to direct Your Government for the
good of your People, the punishment of male-factours,
and praise of well-doers, that this fire of unnatural and unchristian
warre being extinguished, the People of God, Your
Majesties good Subjects may lead a quiet and peaceable life,
in all godlinesse and honestie.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="195"/><anchor id="Pg195"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>The Answer of the General Assembly of the
Church of Scotland, to the Declaration of
the honourable Houses of the Parliament
of England.</hi></head>

<p>
The General Assembly of the Church of Scotland, having
received a Declaration from the honourable
Houses of the Parliament of England, by their Committees
and Commissioners now residing here; have thought
good to make knowne unto the Lords and Commons in
Parliament, that all the Members of this Assembly, and
others well-affected here, do with most thankful respects,
take special notice of the expressions which they have been
pleased to make in the afore-named Declaration, not only
concerning their approbation of the desires and endeavours
of the General Assembly of this Kirk, for the Reformation
of the Church of England, and the union of both
Churches in Religion and Church-government; but also
concerning the resolution of both Houses, fully to concurre
with them in these pious intentions. With the same
thankfulnesse and due reverence, they acknowledge the
high respects expressed towards them by both Houses, in
directing unto them their Committees and Commissioners,
assisted by two reverend Divines, and in desiring some of
the godly and learned of this Kirk to be sent unto the Assembly
sitting there.
</p>

<p>
The Assembly doth blesse the Lord, who hath not only
inspired the Houses of Parliament with desires and resolutions
of the Reformation of Religion, but hath advanced
by several steps and degrees that blessed Work; By which,
as they shall most approve themselves to the Reformed
Churches abroad, and to their Brethren of Scotland, so
shall they most powerfully draw even from Heaven the blessings
of prosperity and peace upon England. And as it is
the earnest wish of their Brethren here, that the true state
and ground of the present differences and controversies in
England may be more and more cleared to be concerning
<pb n="196"/><anchor id="Pg196"/>
Religion, and that both Houses may uncessantly prosecute
that good Work first and above all other matters, giving no
sleep to their eyes, nor slumber to their eye-lids, until
they finde out a place for the Lord, an habitation for the
mighty GOD of <hi rend='italic'>Jacob</hi>, whose favour alone can make their
mountain strong, and whose presence in his own ordinances
shall be their glory in the midst of them: So it is our confidence,
that the begun Reformation is of GOD, and not
of man, that it shall increase, and not decrease; and that he
to whom nothing is to hard, who can make mountaines,
valleyes, crooked things, straigth, and rough wayes,
smooth, shall lead along and make perfect this most wonderful
Work, which shall be remembred to his glory in the
Church throughout all generations.
</p>

<p>
And lest through any defect upon the General Assemblies
part, the Work of Reformation (which hitherto to
the great grief of all the Godly hath moved so slowly) should
be any more retarded or interrupted, they have according
to the renewed desires of both Houses of Parliament, and
their own former promises, nominated and elected Master
<hi rend='italic'>Alexander Henderson</hi>, Mr <hi rend='italic'>Robert Douglas</hi>,
Mr <hi rend='italic'>Samuel Rutherfoord</hi>,
Mr <hi rend='italic'>Robert Balzie</hi>, Mr <hi rend='italic'>George Gillespie</hi>,
Ministers of Gods Word; and <hi rend='italic'>John</hi> Earle of Cassels,
<hi rend='italic'>John</hi> Lord Maitland,
and Sir <hi rend='italic'>Archbald Jonhstuon</hi> of Warritoun, ruling Elders,
all of them men much approved here; With Commission
and power to them, or any three of them, whereof
two shall be Ministers, to repair unto the Assembly of
Divines, and other of the Church of England, now sitting
at Westminster, to propound, consult, treat, and conclude
with them, and with any Committees deputed by the
Houses of Parliament; (if it shall seeme good to the honourable
Houses in their wisedome to depute any for that end)
in all such things as may conduce to the utter extirpation of
Popery, Prelacie, Heresie, Schisme, Superstition and Idolatrie,
And for the feeling of the so much desired Union
of this whole island in one forme of Church government,
one Confession of Faith, one common Catechisme, and
one Directorie for the Worship of GOD, according to
the Instructions which they have received, or shall receive
<pb n="197"/><anchor id="Pg197"/>
from the Commissioners of the Generall Assembly appointed
to meet at Edinburgh from time to time, with the Assemblies
power for that end. And as the Generall Assembly
doth most gladly and affectionatly receive and fully trust
the Committees and Divines sent hither, so do they hereby
commend the afore-named Commissioners, not only to the
like affection and trust of the Assembly there, but also to
the favour and protection of both Houses of Parliament.
</p>

<p>
And for the further satisfaction and encouragement of
their Brethren of England, the whole Assembly in their own
name, and in name of all the particular Churches in this
Kingdome, whom they represent; Do hereby declare, that
from their zeal to the glory of GOD, and propagation of
the Gospell, from their affection to the happinesse of their
native King, and of the Kingdome of England, and from
the sense of their own interest in the common dangers of
Religion, Peace, and Libertie, They are most willing
and ready to be united and associated with their Brethren
in a nearer League and solemne Covenant for the maintenance
of the truly reformed Protestant Religion, against Popery
and Prelacie, and against all Popish and Prelatical corruptions,
in doctrine, discipline, worship, or Church-government,
and for the settling and holding fast of unity
and uniformity betwixt the Kirks of this Iland, and
with the best reformed Churches beyond sea. Which
Union and Covenant, shall with Gods assistance be seconded
by their cooperating with their Brethren in the use of the
best and most effectall meanes that may serve for so good
ends; For the more speedy effectuating whereof, to the
comfort and inlargement of their distressed Brethren (whose
hope deferred might make their hearts to faint) the whole
Assembly with great unanimity of judgement, and expressions
of much affection have approved (for their part) such
a draught and forme of a mutuall Leagu and Covenant betwixt
the Kingdomes, as was the result of the joint debates
and consultations of the Commissioners from both
Houses, assisted by the two reverend Divines, and of
the Committees deputed from the Convention of the Estates
of this Kingdome, and from the Genrall Assembly:
</p>

<pb n="198"/><anchor id="Pg198"/>

<p>
Expecting and wishing the like approbation thereof by the
right honourable the Lords and Commons in Parliament,
and by the reverend Assembly there, That thereafter it may
be solemnely sworne and subscribed in both Kingdomes, as
the surest and straitest obligation to make both stand and fall
together in that cause of Religion and Libertie.
</p>

<p>
As the Estates of this Kingdome have often professed in
their former Declarations, the integritie of their Intentions
against the common enemies of Religion and Libertie in
both Kingdomes, and their great affection to their Brethren
of England, by reason of so many and so near relations:
So doubtlesse now in this time of need they will
not fail to give reall proof of what before they professed.
<hi rend='italic'>A friend loveth at all times, and a brother is born for adversitie.</hi>
Neither shall the Assembly, or their Commissioners be wanting
in exhorting all others to their duty, or in concurring so
far as belongeth to their place and vocation, with the Estates
now conveened, in any lawful and possible course which
may most conduce to the good of Religion and Reformation,
the honour and happinesse of the Kings Majestie, the
deliverance of their Brethren of England from their present
calamitous condition, and to the perpetuating of a firme and
happy peace betwixt the Kingdomes.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>The Assemblies Answer to the right reverend
the Assembly of Divines in the Church
of England.</hi></head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Right reverend and dearly beloved,</hi>
</p>

<p>
As the sufferings of Christ abound in you, So our heartie
desire to God is, that your consolations may much more
abound by Christ. The perusing of your Letter, produced
in every one of us such a mixture of affections, as were
at the laying of the foundation of the second Temple,
where there was heard both shouting for joy, and weeping
<pb n="199"/><anchor id="Pg199"/>
aloud; We rejoyced that Christ our Lord had at last in
that Land created a new thing, in calling together, not as
before of a Prelaticall Convocation to be task-masters over
the people of the Lord, but an Assembly of godly Divines,
minding the things of the Lord, whose hearts are set to
purge the defiled House of GOD in that Land: yet this
our joy was not a little allayed by the consideration of the
sad and deplorable condition of that Kingdome, where the
high provocations of so many years, the hellish plots of so
many enemies in a nick of time, have brought in an inundation
of over-flowing calamities: We know you are patiently
bearing the indignation of the Lord, because you have sinned
against him, till he throughly plead your cause, and
disquiet the inhabitants of Babylon, who now laugh among
themselves, while you are fed with the bread of
tears, and get tears to drink in great measure, being on the
mountains like the doves of the valleyes, all of you mourning
every one for his iniquitie.
</p>

<p>
It is now more nor evident to all the Kirks of Christ, with
what implacable fury and hellish rage, the bloud-thirstie
Papists, as <hi rend='italic'>Babylon</hi> without, and the Prelaticall Faction,
the children of <hi rend='italic'>Edom</hi> within, having adjoyned to themselves
many malignant adherents, of time-serving Atheists,
haters of holinesse, rejecters of the yoke of Christ, (to
whom the morning light of Reformation is as the shadow of
death) have begun to swallow up the inheritance of the
Lord, and are not easily satisfied in making deep and long
furrowes on your backs. We cannot say that the loudnesse of
your cry surpasseth the heavinesse of your stroake; but
though <hi rend='italic'>the Lord hath delivered the men, every one into his neigbours
hand, and into the hand of his King, and they have smitten the Land,
yet the rod of the wicked shall not not rest upon the lot of the righteous</hi>:
This cloud shall speedily passe away, and a fair sun-shine
shall appear.
</p>

<p>
As for us, though your extreeme calamitie did not threaten
the ruine of our Religion, Peace, and Liberties, as
it doth most evidently, we would hate our selves, if we did
not finde our hearts within us melting with compassion over
you: You are engraven on the tables of our hearts to live and
<pb n="200"/><anchor id="Pg200"/>
die with you: we could desire that our heads were waters,
and our eyes a fountain of tears, that we might weep day
and night for the slain of the daughter of the Lords people;
So calamitous a condition of any of the Kirks of Christ,
could not but be very grievous unto us; How much more
shall not we stoup and fall down in the dust to embrace our
dearest Brethren of England, to whom we are tied in to
near and tender relations. When we were but creeping
out of the deep darknesse and bondage of Popery, and were
almost crushed with the fury of Foreigne Invaders, joined
with intestine enemies, pretending the name and warrand
of authority, as now your oppressours do; Then did the
Lord by your Fathers send us seasonable assistance against
that intended and begun bondage both of soul and body:
The repayment of which debt, the Divine Providence
seemeth now to require at our hands. And whereas of late
through our security we had fallen into a wofull relapse, and
were compassed about with dreadfull dangers on all hands,
while we aymed at the recovery of our former puritie and
libertie: Then we wanted not the huge supply of your fervent
Prayers, and other brotherly assistance of that Nation,
while those who are now your malignant enemies, would
have swallowed us up.
</p>

<p>
These strait bonds of your ancient and late love, do so
possesse our hearts, that when the motions of the Commissioners
of honourable House of Parliament, and your
Letters did challenge our advice and aid for defence of Religion,
and advancement of Reformation, our
desires for a more strict Union and Uniformitie in Religion
betwixt both the Nations, did break forth into a vehement
flame, in such sort, as when the draugt of a League and
Covenant betwixt both Kingdoms for defence of Religion,
&amp;c. was read in open audience, it was so unanimously
and heartily embraced, with such a torrent of most affectionate
expressions, as none but eye or ear witnesses can conceive
whereof the two reverend Divines sent from you to us
being then present, no doubt will give you an account. Neither
was it so onely with us, but also the honourable Convention
of Estates here, with the like harmony of affectionate
<pb n="201"/><anchor id="Pg201"/>
expressions, did entertain the same; So that we hope to be
reall and constant in prosecuting the contents of this Covenant.
When we in our straits fled to the Lord, and entred
in Covenant with him, he owned us and our Cause, rebuked
and dissipated our enemies, and hitherto hath helped us, and
blessed our entreprises with successe from heaven, notwithstanding
our great weaknesse and unworthinesse. We trust in
the Lord, that as once it was prophesied of
<hi rend='italic'>Israel</hi> &amp; <hi rend='italic'>Judah</hi>, So
shall Scotland &amp; England shall become one stick in the hand
of the Lord, they shall ask the way to <hi rend='italic'>Sion</hi>, with their faces
thitherward, saying, Come, let us joyne our selves to the Lord
in a perpetual Covenant, that shall not be forgotten; And so
shall it come to passe, that the Lords Jerusalem in this Island,
shall be a cup of trembling, and a burthensome stone to all
their enemies roundabout. Though now it be the time of
<hi rend='italic'>Jacobs</hi> trouble, the Lord will deliver him out of it. Reverend
and dear Brethren, we conceive your case, and of all the
Faithful in that Land to be no other then of a woman crying,
travelling in birth, and pained till she be delivered. The
great red Dragon, (under whose standard the sons of <hi rend='italic'>Belial</hi>
are fighting) is your Arch enemy, This cannot but be a
time of fear and sorrow; But when the male childe shall
be brought forth, the pain shall cease, and the sorrow shall
be forgotten. We are very confident in the Lord, that you
will be faithful to Jesus Christ, in the work committed to
you by him in all his ordinances, and taking neither foundation,
corner stone, nor any part of the rubbish of Babel to
build the City that is called, <hi rend='italic'>The Lord is there</hi>: But measuring
all with the golden reed of the Sanctuary, you may more closely
be united to the best Reformed Kirks, in Doctrine,
Worship, and Government, that you may grow up in him in
all things which is the head, even Christ.
</p>

<p>
And now Reverend and dear Brethren, though we know
that you abound in all gifts and graces, the Spirit of Jesus
Christ being plentifully powred out upon you, yet according
to your desire and the motion made by the Commissioners of
the Honourable Houses of Parliament, to testifie our hearty
sympathie with you in the work of the Lord, We
have nominate and elected some Godly and learned of
<pb n="202"/><anchor id="Pg202"/>
this Church to repair to your Assembly. We doubt
nothing of your hearty embracing them in the Lord,
and their diligent concurrance with you in advancing that
great work.
</p>

<p>
Not onely the common danger we are under, but the conscience
of our duty to his suffering people, layeth bonds on
us frequently to present you, and that blessed Work of Reformation,
in your hands, to the throne of Grace, that
the GOD of all Grace, who will call you into his eternal
glory by Christ Jesus, after that you have suffered and
a while may make you perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle
you.
</p>

<p>
Edinburgh, August 19. 1643.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Subscribed in name of the Assembly of the Church Scotland,
by the Clerk, of the Assembly.</hi>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>The Assemblies Answer to the Reverend
their beloved Brethren, Ministers in the
Church of England.</hi></head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Reverend and beloved,</hi>
</p>

<p>
We acknowledge with thankfulnesse to GOD, that this
is one of the good blessings bestowed upon our Kirk of
late, and a pleasant fruit of our free Assemblies, That a
way is opened for keeping communion with our sister Kirks
abroad, and correspondence with you our dear Brethren,
in whose joy and sorrow we have so near interest,
and whose cause and condition we desire to lay to heart as
our own.
</p>

<p>
All your former Letters were most acceptable, and full of
refreshment unto us, being taken as the earnest of a more
full and constant fellowship, longed after and hoped for:
And this your last, although full of sadnesse and sorrow,
yet accounted of us all most worthy of our tenderst affection
and best respects, both for your cause who sent it, and for
<pb n="203"/><anchor id="Pg203"/>
these worthy witnesses which did attest it: Wherein as you
have given unto us no small evidence, not only of your
love, but also of trust and friendly respect, by choosing
to poure out your grieved souls in our bosome; so we shall
with, and Godwilling endeavour, that you may really
finde some measure of brotherly compassion in our receiving
thereof. For these your sad expressions of deep sorrow,
being as you have given us to conceive but a part of
your complaint, and a lamentation lesse then the causes
doth require, cannot but melt every heart, wherein there
is any the least warmnesse of the love of Christ and his Saints:
And what Childe of the Bridegrooms chamber, can hear the
voice of so many friends of the Bridegroom, lamenting for
the evils which have befallen Christs Bride in England, in
the very night before her expected espousals, and not sit
down and mourn with them except his heart be fallen asleep
and frozen within him? This pitiful condition of our
sister Church in England hes matter enough we confesse to
move, yea, to rend our bowels.
</p>

<p>
If we should weigh this your heavie grief in the scales of
common reason, we behoved either to stand aloof from
your plague as men astonished, or sink down in heavinesse
and be swallowed up of sorrow: but when we ponder your
sad condition in the Ballance of the Sanctuary, we finde that
nothing hath as yet befallen unto you, save that which
hath been the exercise of the Saints in former times,
who have been made to sit down for a while in the shadow
of death before the day of their deliverance. We
finde nothing but that which may be a fit Preparation
for a comfortable out-gate from all your troubles. What
if it was necessary in the wise dispensation of Almighty
GOD, that a People in great estimation for wisedome
and power, such as England, should be thus farre humbled,
as you declare, to the end that your deliverance
maybe seen hereafter to be of the Lord, and not of your
selves? What if the Lord would not draw back his hand
from the Wine-presse wherein you now lye, till he should
draw forth from you these pitiful expressions of your low estate,
and so provide himself witnesses against the day to
<pb n="204"/><anchor id="Pg204"/>
come, that he may have the greater and purer glory in your
salvation, and your gloriation may be in the Lord alone!
Dear Brethren, comfort your selves in the Lord; this
sowing in tears, doth promise a reaping in joy, and who
knoweth how soon he will give to you who are mourners
in Zion, beauty for ashes, the oyle of joy for mourning,
the garment of praise for the spirit of heavinesse; That you
may be called the trees of righteousness, the planting of the
Lord, that he may be glorified.
</p>

<p>
Though weeping be in the evening of this begun Reformation
and purging of the Lords House among you,
yet in the morning when the discovered filthinesse and
sweepings of the Temple shall be orderly cast out, joy
shall come with thanksgiving and praise. Though a fire
be kindled in the Land, yet it is not to consume any of the
mettal, for the Lord is sitting down as a Refiner amongst
you, and especially to purifie the sons of <hi rend='italic'>Levi</hi>, that he may
have a more pure oblation of spiritual worship and service in
all his holy ordinances throughout all the Land, which is
no token of wrath, but of loving kindnesse towards you.
No wonder that Satan doth thus rage, as you relate, foreseeing
his casting out: No wonder he stirre up all the
children of disobedience, and kindle their natural malice
against the children of God with the inspiration of hellish
fury: No wonder the spirit of Antichrist be mad, when
the morsel half swallowed down, is like to be pulled
out of his throat, the fat morsel of the rich Revenues of
England: No wonder he be cruell against you the servants
of Christ, who are consuming him by the breath of the
Lords mouth.
</p>

<p>
You do well to expect no mercy, if Papists and Prelats
prevail over you, neither desire we to deceive our selves
with hopes to be free from what the power and malice can
do against us; for they will not do to us if they get the
upper-hand, as we have done, and must do, if God bring
them low again under us; as they were before; for we and
they are led by the contrary spirits of Christ, and Anti-Christ:
We have laboured, and must labour for their conversion,
but they (except in so far as God shall bridle them)
<pb n="205"/><anchor id="Pg205"/>
will not rest without our destruction; for their fury against
our persons is much more fierie then our zeal is fervent against
their abominations: Let them follow the spirit of
lying and murthering, we must take us to our refuge, and
joyne our selves with all that are sensible of
the danger of the reformed Religion in prayer and supplication.
<hi rend='italic'>The Lord of Hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is
our refuge.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Now for advice, what can we say to you who are upon
your watch tower, wherein is the spirit of wisedome and
counsel; who lye thus as humble Disciples under the Lords
foot, who did never forsake them that sought him. Go on
in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, against all opposition,
without fear of whatsoever dangers, to purge the
House of the Lord, to repair the breaches thereof, to set
up all his Ordinances in their full beautie and perfection, to
the uttermost of your power, according to the pattern of
the Word of GOD, and zeal of the best reformed Kirks;
And let these two Kingdomes be knit together as one man
in maintaining and promoving the truth of the Gospel, Let
us enter in a perpetual Covenant for our selves and our posterity,
to endevour that all things may be done in the House
of GOD according to his own will, and let the Lord
do with us what seemeth good in his eyes. <hi rend='italic'>Only wait
upon the lord, be of good courage, and he shall strengthen
your heart.</hi> Let your hands be ever at your Masters Work,
and hold your faces resolutely to his Cause. <hi rend='italic'>Watch ye,
stand fast in the faith, quite your selves like men, be strong,
for ye shall see the salvation of the Lord,</hi> and your labour shall
not be in vain.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Subscribed in name of the Generall Assembly of the
Church of Scotland, by the Clerk of the Assembly.</hi>
</p>

</div>

<pb n="206"/><anchor id="Pg206"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Commission of the Generall Assembly, for
these that repair to the Kingdome of
England.</hi></head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly of the Church of Scotland,
finding it necessary to send some Godly and learned
of this Kirk to the Kingdome of England, to the effect
under-written. Therefore gives full Power and Commission
to Master <hi rend='italic'>Alexander Henderson</hi>, Master
<hi rend='italic'>Robert Douglas</hi>, Master <hi rend='italic'>Samuel Rutherfoord</hi>,
Master <hi rend='italic'>Robert Bailzie</hi>, and Master
<hi rend='italic'>George Gillespie</hi>, Ministers, <hi rend='italic'>John</hi>
Earl of Cassills, <hi rend='italic'>John</hi>
Lord Maitland, and Sir <hi rend='italic'>Archbald Johnstoun</hi> of Waristoun Elders,
or any three of them, whereof two shall be Ministers,
to repair to the Kingdome of England, and there to
deliver the Declaration sent unto the Parliament of England
and the Letter sent unto the Assembly of Divines now sitting
in that Kingdome. And to propone, consult, treat and
conclude with that Assembly or any Commissioners deputed
by them, or any Committees or Commissioners deputed
by the Houses of Parliament, in all matters which may
further the Union of this Island in one forme of Kirk-government,
one confession of Faith, one Catechisme, and
one Directorie for the Worship of GOD, according to the
Instructions which they have received from the Assembly,
or shall receive from time to time hereafter from the Commissioners
of the Assembly deputed for that effect. With
power also to them to convey to his Majestie, the humble
Answer sent from this Assembly to his Majesties Letter, by
such occasion as they shall think convenient; And suchlike
to deliver the Assemblies Answer to the Letter sent from
some wel-affected Brethren of the Ministry there. And
generally authorizes them to do all things which may further
the so much desired Union, and nearest conjunction of
the two Churches of Scotland and England, conform to
their Instructions aforesaid.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="207"/><anchor id="Pg207"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Reference to the Commission, anent the Persons
designed to repair to the the Kingdome
of England.</hi></head>

<p>
The Assembly having this day approven the nomination
made by the Commissioners of the late Assembly, of
persons to repair to the Synod of Divines in England: And
having of new elected and nominated all the same Persons,
except Master <hi rend='italic'>Eleazar Borthwick</hi>, who is now with GOD.
Therefore gives power to the Commissioners to be appointed
by this Assembly for the publick affairs of this Kirk, to
nominate and appoint any other whom they shall think
meet in his place. And suchlike the Assembly refers to
the said Commission, to consider whether it be convenient
to send now at this present time to the Kingdome of England,
all the Persons appointed to go thither, and to designe
the Persons whom they think meet to go at this present
occasion, to determine the time of their dispatch, and
to give unto them their Instructions. And further in case of
sicknesse or death of any of the Persons appointed for that
employment, or in the case of any other necessary impediment
of their undertaking the samine; Gives power to the
said Commission, to nominate others in their place if the
Commission shall finde it convenient.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Commission for the Publick Affairs
of this Kirk.</hi></head>

<p>
The General Assembly, considering the laudable costome
of this Kirk, in appointing Commissions betwixt Assemblies
for the publick affairs of the Kirk, and the commendable
practice of the late Assembly at Saint Andrews,
in appointing their Commission for prosecuting the blessed
Work, for uniting the Kirks of this Island in Religion and
Kirk-government, by all lawfull and Ecclesiastick wayes,
<pb n="208"/><anchor id="Pg208"/>
for continuance of our own peace at home, and of the common
peace bytwixt the two Nations, and for other good
ends, as at length is exprest in that Commission: And finding
that the painful endevours and proceedings of that Commission,
unanimously approven in this Assembly, though
they have much advanced that glorious Work of Unity in
Religion and Government; Yet has not brought the samine
to full perfection and a finall accomplishment: And the
Assembly being now much animate and encouraged to prosecute
that Work by the Parliament of England their Bills
past against Episcopacie, and sundry other corruptions,
and the good hopes of a solemne Covenant betwixt the Nations,
And conceiving that in their times of danger there may
be some occasions for conveening the Assembly, before
the time indicted for their next meeting. Therefore the
Assembly finding it necessary to appoint a new Commission,
By these presents, nominates and appoints Mr <hi rend='italic'>Andrew Ramsay</hi>,
Mr <hi rend='italic'>Alexander Henderson</hi>, Mr <hi rend='italic'>Robert Douglas</hi>,
Mr <hi rend='italic'>William Colvil</hi>, Mr <hi rend='italic'>William Bennet</hi>,
Mr <hi rend='italic'>George Gillespie</hi>, Mr <hi rend='italic'>John Adamson</hi>,
Mr <hi rend='italic'>John Sharpe</hi>, Mr <hi rend='italic'>James Sharpe</hi>,
Mr <hi rend='italic'>William Dalgleish</hi>, Mr <hi rend='italic'>David Calderwood</hi>,
Mr <hi rend='italic'>Andrew Blackhall</hi>, Mr <hi rend='italic'>James Fleeming</hi>,
Mr <hi rend='italic'>Robert Ker</hi>, Mr <hi rend='italic'>John Macghie</hi>,
Mr <hi rend='italic'>Oliver Colt</hi>, Mr <hi rend='italic'>Hugh Campbell</hi>,
Mr <hi rend='italic'>Adam Penman</hi>, Mr <hi rend='italic'>Richard Dickson</hi>,
Mr <hi rend='italic'>Andrew Stevinson</hi>, Mr <hi rend='italic'>John Lauder</hi>,
Mr <hi rend='italic'>Robert Blair</hi>, Mr <hi rend='italic'>Samuel Rutherfoord</hi>,
Mr <hi rend='italic'>Arthur Morton</hi>, Mr <hi rend='italic'>Robert Traill</hi>,
Mr <hi rend='italic'>Frederick Carmichell</hi>, Mr <hi rend='italic'>Mungo Law</hi>,
Mr <hi rend='italic'>John Smith</hi>, Mr <hi rend='italic'>Patrick Gillespie</hi>,
Mr <hi rend='italic'>John Duncan</hi>, Mr <hi rend='italic'>John Hume</hi>, Mr
<hi rend='italic'>Robert Knox</hi>, Mr <hi rend='italic'>William Jameson</hi>,
Mr <hi rend='italic'>Robert Mura</hi>, Mr <hi rend='italic'>Henry Guthrie</hi>,
Mr <hi rend='italic'>James Hamilton</hi>, Mr <hi rend='italic'>Bernard Sanderson</hi>,
Mr <hi rend='italic'>John Leviston</hi>, Mr <hi rend='italic'>James Boner</hi>,
Mr <hi rend='italic'>Evan Cameron</hi>, Mr <hi rend='italic'>David Dickson</hi>,
Mr <hi rend='italic'>Robert Bailzie</hi>, Mr <hi rend='italic'>James Cunninghame</hi>,
Mr <hi rend='italic'>George Youngh</hi>, Mr <hi rend='italic'>Andrew Auchinleck</hi>,
Mr <hi rend='italic'>David Lindsay</hi>, Mr <hi rend='italic'>Andrew Cant</hi>,
Mr <hi rend='italic'>John Oiswald</hi>, Mr <hi rend='italic'>William Douglas</hi>,
Mr <hi rend='italic'>Murdoc Mackenzie</hi>, Mr <hi rend='italic'>Coline Mackenzie</hi>,
Mr <hi rend='italic'>John Monroe</hi>, Mr <hi rend='italic'>Walter Stuart</hi>,
Ministers: Marquesse of <hi rend='italic'>Argyle</hi>,
Earle <hi rend='italic'>Marshell</hi>, Earle of <hi rend='italic'>Sutherland</hi>,
Earle of <hi rend='italic'>Eglintoun</hi>, Earle of <hi rend='italic'>Cassils</hi>,
Earle of <hi rend='italic'>Dumsermling</hi>, Earle of <hi rend='italic'>Lawderdail</hi>,
Earle of <hi rend='italic'>Lindsay</hi>, Earle of <hi rend='italic'>Queensberrie</hi>,
Earle of <hi rend='italic'>Dalhouse</hi>, Lord
<pb n="209"/><anchor id="Pg209"/>
<hi rend='italic'>Angus</hi>, Vicount of <hi rend='italic'>Dudhope</hi>,
Lord <hi rend='italic'>Maitland</hi>, Lord <hi rend='italic'>Elcho</hi>
Lord <hi rend='italic'>Balmarinoch</hi>, Lord <hi rend='italic'>Cowper</hi>,
Sir <hi rend='italic'>Patrick Hepburne</hi> of Wauchtoun,
Sir <hi rend='italic'>Archbald Johnstoun</hi> of Waristoun,
Sir <hi rend='italic'>David Hume</hi> of Wedderborne,
Sir <hi rend='italic'>Alexander Areskine</hi> of Duns,
Sir <hi rend='italic'>William Cockburne</hi> of Langtoun,
Sir <hi rend='italic'>Thomas Ruthven</hi> of Frieland,
Sir <hi rend='italic'>James Arnos</hi> of Fernie,
Sir <hi rend='italic'>Walter Riddell</hi> of that Ilk.,
Sir <hi rend='italic'>Lodonick Houstoun</hi> of that Ilk,
Sir <hi rend='italic'>William Carmichael</hi> Fiar of that Ilk,
Laird of <hi rend='italic'>Bonjedburgh</hi>, Laird of <hi rend='italic'>Libbertoun</hi>,
Laird of <hi rend='italic'>Brodie</hi>, Sir <hi rend='italic'>John Smith</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>James Dennistoun</hi>,
Master <hi rend='italic'>Barclay, John Rutherfoord</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>William Glendinning, John Sempill, John Kennedie</hi>, Master
<hi rend='italic'>Alexander Douglas</hi>, To meet at Edinburgh the 21. day
of August next, and upon any other day thereafter,
and in any other place they shall think good. And
gives and grants unto them, or any fifteen of them,
there being twelve Ministers present, full power and
Commission, to consider and performe what they finde
necessary by Praying and Preaching, by supplicating
his Majestie and all the Judicatories of this Kingdome,
by Declarations and Remonstrances to the Parliament
of England, to the Synod of Divines in that Kingdome,
by Informations, Directions, Instructions to,
and continual correspondence with the Commissioners,
now designed by this Assembly to go to the Synod
of Divines in England, or by any other lawful Ecclesiastick
wayes, for furtherance of this great Work,
in the Union of this Island in Religion and Kirk-goverment,
and for continuance of our own Peace at
home, and of the common Peace betwixt the Nations,
and keeping of good correspondence betwixt the
Kirks of this Island. With power also to them to concurre
with the Lords of Councel, Commissioners of
Peace, or with the Honourable Estates assembled in
Convention or Parliament, or with their Committees
and Commissioners, in prosecuting this good Work at
home or abroad by all Ecclesiastick wayes. And suchlike
with power to them to prevent the dangers conteined
in the Remonstrance, presented unto the Convention
<pb n="210"/><anchor id="Pg210"/>
of Estates by the Commissioners of the late Assembly in
<hi rend='italic'>June</hi> last, and to prosecute the remedies of these dangers
conteined in another Remonstrance, presented by the <hi rend='italic'>aids</hi>
Commissioners to the Convention the 6. of <hi rend='italic'>July</hi>
last by admonitions, directions, censures, and all
other Ecclesiastick wayes. And further in case their
Brethren of England shall agree to the Covenant betwixt
the Kingdomes, the draught and frame whereof
is now so unanimously approven in this Assembly
Gives also unto the Persons foresaid, or the <hi rend='italic'>Quorum</hi>
above-written, full Power and Authoritie to command
and enjoyn the samine to be subscribed and sworn by
all the members of this Kirk: And that in such order
and manner, and with such solemnities as they shall
think convenient for so great and glorious a Work;
And to send their directions to Sessions, Presbyteries
and Synods, for execution of their orders thereanent.
And with power to proceed against any Person whatsoever,
that shall refuse to subscribe and swear the said
Covenant, with all the censures of the Kirk, or to refer
the tryall and censures of such delinquents to Presbyteries
or Synods as they shall think convenient. And
such like gives unto the persons foresaids power and libertie,
to call a General Assembly <hi rend='italic'>pro re nata</hi>, in case
they shall finde the necessity of the Kirk, and this great
Work to require the same: With full power also to
them to give Answers in name of the Assembly, to
all Letters sent to the Assembly from the Kirks of Holland,
Zealand, or any other forraigne Reformed Kirks.
And further gives power to them to promove the other
desires, Overtures and recommendations of this,
or of any former Assemblies to the Kings Majestie,
Parliament or Convention of Estates, to the Lords of
Councel, Session, Exchequer, Commissioners of Parliaments,
for plantation of Kirks, for the common burdens,
and for conserving the Peace. And suchlike
gives as full power and Commission to them to treat and
decerne in any other matters referred, or to be referred
<pb n="211"/><anchor id="Pg211"/>
to them by this Assembly, as if the samine were herein
particalarly insert. And generally gives unto the Persons
foresaids, or the <hi rend='italic'>Quorum</hi> abovementioned full power
and Authoritie, to do and performe all things which
may advance, accomplish, and perfect the great Work
of Unity of Religion, and Uniformity of Kirk-government
in all his Majesties Dominions, and which may be
necessary for good order in all the publick affairs of this
Kirk, untill the next Assembly, <hi rend='italic'>ne quid detrimenti capiat
Ecclesia</hi>. With als ample power in all matters particularly
or generally above-mentioned, as any other
Commission of General Assemblies, has had or been in
use of before; They being alwayes countable to, and
censurable by the next General Assembly, for their proceedings
thereintill.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The General Assembly appoints the meeting of
the next General Assembly, to be at Edinburgh
the last Wednesday of May, in the year 1644.</hi>
</p>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<pb n="212"/><anchor id="Pg212"/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>The Generall Assembly, At Edinburgh, 1644.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Die Jovis penult. Maii, Sess. 2.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>The Letter from the Presbyeerie with the
Army in</hi> England, <hi rend='italic'>to the Generall Assembly.</hi></head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Right reverend</hi>,
</p>

<p>
Having the opportunity of the sitting of this Venerable
Assembly, we thought our selves obliged
to render some accompt of the state of our Affairs.
It hath pleased the Lord to exercise us
since our out-coming, with many straits and difficulties,
yet in the mids thereof he hath wonderfully upheld and
carried us through. The depth of his wisedome hath suspended
us for a time from any great action, to make us walk
humbly before him, and to keep us in a continual dependance
upon himself: And yet he hath by his own power
scattered before us the great Popish Army, and much diminished
the number thereof, so that they do not now appeare
against us in the Fields; That all may learne to trust in
<pb n="213"/><anchor id="Pg213"/>
GOD, and not in Man. It was farre from our thoughts
and intentions to have come this length at that instant when
the course of Divine Providence pointed out our way unto
us, which led us on by some long and speedie marches
to joyne with my Lord <hi rend='italic'>Fairfax</hi> and his Sonne their Forces.
The City of <hi rend='italic'>York</hi>, wherein a swarme of obstinate
Papists have taken sanctuary, is blocked up; Now and
then God favoureth us with successe in some enterprises about
it, and wee look for more if the time be come which
he hath appointed for the deliverance of this People.
</p>

<p>
Our Soules do abhorre the treacherous attempts of our
disnatured Countrey-men, that have endeavoured to
make their native Kingdome a seat of Warre, and our
bowels within us are moved to think upon the maine mischiefs,
if not timeously prevented, that may follow upon
the unatural Warres there; Like unto these under which
this Kingdome hath groaned for a long time. We have
found none more malicous and cruel against us than these
of our own Nation, and we measure those at home, by
these here; <hi rend='italic'>Cursed be their rage, for it is fierce, and their anger
for it is cruell.</hi> The present danger calls upon all to lay
out of their hands what ever may hinder their haste, as one
Man to come together for saving the Vine-yeard that the
wilde Boares would lay waste, and taking the Foxes that
would destroy the Vines. You are, Right Reverend,
now set upon the highest Watch-tower, from whence
you may discover the dangers that threaten on all coasts,
and we need not put you in minde to give warning to the
Watch-men in their severall stations; To rouze up the
People from their too great security; To call them to
unfeigned Humiliation, and to stirre them up to wrestle
with GOD by prayer; that hee would preserve Truth
and Peace at home against the machinations of Malignants;
That hee would prepare the People here, and make them
more fit to embrace the intended Reformation; And
that hee would command these unnaturall and bloudy
Warres to cease, that Religion and Righteousnesse may
flourish through the three Dominions, Praying GOD to send
<pb n="214"/><anchor id="Pg214"/>
upon you the Spirit of truth, who may lead you in all truth.
We remaine
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Middle-thorp, 20. May, 1644.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Your loving Brethren, The Presbyterie of the
Scottish Army in</hi> England,
</p>

<p>
Master <hi rend='italic'>Robert Douglas</hi>, Moderator in their name.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>The Petition from the distressed Christians in
the North of</hi> Ireland.</head>

<p>
To the Reverend and Honourable Moderator
and remanent Members of the Generall Assembly
of <hi rend='italic'>Scotland</hi>, conveened at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>
in May 1644.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The humble Petition of the distressed Christians
in the North of</hi> Ireland.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Humbly sheweth,</hi>
</p>

<p>
That whereas your former enlarged bounty, and our
present overflowing straits would require a gratefull
acknowledgement of the one, and a serious representation
of the other: Our case is such, as neither can be expected
at our hands, being stricken with astonishment, and full
of the furie of the Lord. We are these indeed who have
seen affliction by the rod of his wrath: So that it were more
fit, we had a Cottage in the Wildernesse amongst the Owles
to mourn out our imbittered Spirits, then that by word or
writ we should compeere before any of his People: Although
you cannot be wearied in wel-doing, yet we shall up
way think it strange, if now you shall give over any more
care of us; Seeing the Lord hath testified against us, and
the Almighty hath afflicted us. Your judgement is with the
Lord, and your reward is with God, not onely for your
two years visiting and watering a barren vineyard, but also
<pb n="215"/><anchor id="Pg215"/>
for your zeale and care to have your Reformation spred amongst
other opprest and borne-down Churches, whereof
you have given an ample and famous testimony in sending
hither that blessed League and Covenant which wee much
desired and longed for, as by our Petitions to the Church
&amp; State of our Native Kingdome is knowne unto you; which
hath had a wished and gracious successe by the favour and
blessing of God, accompanying the pains of these to whom
the tendering thereof was intrusted by you. And we conceiving
a chief part of our miserie to consist in our want of
opportunitie to joyne our selves with the People of God in
the foresaid Leagues; Esteeming our selves rejected of God
and unfit to be joyned in any comfortable fellowship in the
Gospel with them, when the said League and Covenant
was presented to the Regiments; Wee made bold to lay
hold upon the opportunity (though aflicted abjects) and
cheerfully and unanimously joyned our selves thereunto:
That if wee peerish in our misery, wee may die a Covenanted
People: and, if our miserable life be prolonged, we
may finde shelter and refreshment under the shadow thereof
in our fierie trials, confidently expecting from the Lord by
our neerer conjunction with you than before, an accomplishment
of what is agreed into the Covenant, which ye bountifully
expressed before we were one with you, to your
never-dying-commendation. We are nothing shaken in our
minds with the odious aspersions of sedition, combination
against the King: and overthrow of Muncipal Laws, &amp;c.
(wherewith our Covenant is branded) nor with the threats
of these who should be comfortable to us in our troubles:
But are the more encouraged to beleeve that God shall raise
up the Tabernacle of <hi rend='italic'>David</hi> that is fallen, and repair the
breaches thereof: For since we Covenanted with God, and
united our selves together, our dying Spirits have revived,
and we sing like those who have come forth from their Graves,
for God hath had mercy on <hi rend='italic'>Jacob</hi>: In testimony whereof
he hath opened the bowels of the Churches of <hi rend='italic'>Holland</hi>,
who were strangers to us, and yet dear Brethren, and tender
Sympathizers with our afflictions and sorrows, who,
<pb n="216"/><anchor id="Pg216"/>
when these who were left of the Sword were in danger to
dye by famine, did plentifully relieve us in our straits, not
onely by comfortable encouragements to walk humbly with
God, and wait for him who hides his face from the house of
<hi rend='italic'>Jacob</hi> for a season; but also by their rich supply in Victuals
and others necessar for our relief and comfort, which we
humbly desire our Lord to repay seven-fold in their bosome,
and become your Supplicants to joyne with us in a
grateful acknowledgement of their singular favours: And
upon the heels of these favours you have continued your unparalled
compassions in keeping your forces and enabling
them, together with the other Forces, for avenging the cruel
murders, and effusion of Christian blood in this Land, notwithstanding
of your owne multiplied difficulties. The Lord
hath begun to delight into us, and in a day of salvation hath
helped us (So happy are the people who are in Covenant
with God.) We are these (indeed) who may justly be burnt
up for our unfruitfulnesse in the dayes of our plenty, &amp; stubbornesse
in the dayes of our affliction, which has brought us
so low, that where we once enjoyed a blessed plenty, we
must now beg of the crumbs that fall from your Table:
We cannot dissemble, but so farre as we can discern our
owne hearts, we would preferre the joyful sound of the
Gospel to our much wished Peace and precious lives: But
it may be discerned, your Consultations of before have been
guided by the Spirit of the Lord; in that when wee twice
in our forward hasting desires begged the present loosing and
planting of some Ministers amongst us, you judged it more
convenient to supply us by turnes, as foreseeing that our
Captivity was likely to endure: Our hopes are so far revived,
that we trust to see the day when he shall take the Cup of
trembling out of our hands, and put it in the hands of them
that afflicted us.
</p>

<p>
And therefore, if you account us fellow-partners of the
Purchased Inheritance, Yet again suffer our necessitie to
plead with you, that as it hath been by the Committee of
Bils already advised, that a competent number of Ministers
may be gifted to us by your Commission when they shall
set the Calling cleared, the same may be granted as a testimony
<pb n="217"/><anchor id="Pg217"/>
of your confidence, and expectation of our delivery;
And in the meane time some others may be sent by turnes
to keep in the dying lives of above twenty foure desolate
Congregations, who are in danger to perish for want of
Vision: And although we do proteste, we count not our
selves worthy of such favours, yet as we have resolved to
dye with the cry of hope in our mouthes to the Lords
Throne; So in obedience of the use of the means by him appointed,
we stretch out our hearts and our hands to you for
help, and have sent our Brother <hi rend='italic'>William Mackenna</hi> Merchant
at <hi rend='italic'>Belfast</hi>, to attend what answer it shall please the Lord by
you to returne unto
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Your distressed Brethern and
Supplicants.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Subscribed by very many hands.</hi>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>3. <hi rend='italic'>Junii 1644. Antemeridiem.</hi> Sess. 5.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act for the present Entrie of the new erected
Presbyterie at</hi> Biggar.</head>

<p>
The which day anent the Supplication subscribed and
given in to the General Assembly to the Ministers and
ruling Elders of the Kirks of <hi rend='italic'>Biggar, Skirling, Brochton,
Glenquhome, Kelbocho, Culter, Lamyngtoun, Symontoun, Covingtoun
Quothquen, Welstonn</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>Dolphingtoun</hi> making mention,
That the General Assembly at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi> in August 1643.
years, by their Act of the date of the twelfth day of the samine
moneth and year, did upon good grounds, and after tryal and
hearing of all Parties to the full, erect a Presbyterie seat at
<hi rend='italic'>Biggar</hi>, to consist of the Kirks above-written, And granted
to their Presbyterie full power of jurisdiction and exerceing
Discipline, with all other Liberties and Priviledges belonging
to any other Presbyterie; but suspended the
entrie and possession of this new erected Presbyterie,
during the pleasure of the Assembly; And therefore desiring
<pb n="218"/><anchor id="Pg218"/>
the said Generall Assembly to ordaine and appoint the entrie
and possession of the foresaid Presbyterie at <hi rend='italic'>Biggar</hi> now
presently; And to declare, that it is their pleasure, that the
entrie and possession thereof shall be no longer suspended,
as the Supplication proports. Which Supplication being
read in audience of the Generall Assembly, and thereafter
the Commissioners from the Presbyteries of <hi rend='italic'>Lanerk</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Peebles</hi>, and all others having entresse to oppose the desire
foresaid being publickly called, and the saids Commissioners
for <hi rend='italic'>Peebles</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Lanerk</hi> personally present,
being at length heard in what they could say or alledge therein: And the
said the Supplication and desire thereof, with the Alledgeances
and Objections made against the samine, being
taken to consideration by the Assembly, and they therewith
being fully and ripely advised: The Assembly after removing
of the Parties, and after consideration of the premisses
and voycing of the foresaid desire, Ordaines the entrie and
possession of the foresaid Presbyterie of <hi rend='italic'>Biggar</hi>, consisting of
the particular Kirks above-mentioned, to begin now presently;
And appoints and ordaines all the Ministers and
Ruling Elders of the foresaids Kirks above specified, whereof
the said Presbyterie consists, to meet and conveene as
a Presbyterie, with all convenience, at the said Kirk of
<hi rend='italic'>Biggar</hi>, which is the Place and Seat of the samine Presbyterie.
And the Assembly refers to the Commissioners to
be appointed by them for the publick affairs of the Kirk, to
determinn to what Synod the said new erected Presbyterie
shall be subordinate; As also to prescribe the order
and solemnities that shall be necessar for entring and possessing
the Ministers and Elders in the said Presbyterie.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Junii</hi> 3. 1644 Sess.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act concerning the Declaration subscribed by the Scottish
Lords at</hi> Oxford.</head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly having received a Copy of a
Declaration, made and subscribed at <hi rend='italic'>Oxford</hi>, sent unto
<pb n="219"/><anchor id="Pg219"/>
them from the honourable Convention of Estates, and having
seriously considered the tenour thereof, doth finde the same
to be a perfidious Band and unnaturall confederacy, to
bring this Kirk and Kingdome to confusion; and to be full
of blasphemies against the late solemne League and Covenant
of the three Kingdomes, of vile aspersions of Treason,
Rebellion and Sedition, most falsly and impudently imputed
to the Estates and the most faithfull and loyall Subjects of
these Kingdomes, And seeing it is incumbent to the Assembly
to take notice thereof, and to stop the course of
these malicious intentions, in so farre as concernes them,
Declare that the subscribers of this or the like Declaration
or Band, or any that have been accessory to the framing,
or that has been, or shall be accessory to the execution thereof,
deserve the highest censure of the Kirk: And therefore
gives power to the Commissioners of this Assembly appointed
for the publick affairs, to proceed against them to
the sentence of Excommunication, unlesse they make humble
confession of their offence publickly, in such manner,
and in such places as the Commission shall prescribe; Or
otherwise to refer the tryall and censure of such Delinquents
to Presbytereries or Synods as they shall think convenient.
And when the sentence of Excommunication shall be pronounced,
discharges Presbyteries or Synods to relax any
from the sentence, without the advice of the Generall Assembly,
or their Commissioners, <hi rend='italic'>nisi in extremis</hi>. And
in respect of the atrocicite of this Fact, the Assembly in all
humility, do seriously recommend to the right honourable
the Estates of Parliament to take such course, as the persons
that shall be found guilty, may be exemplary punished,
according to the merit of so unnaturall and impious an offence:
And that some publick note of ignominie be put upon
the Declaration and Band it self, if their Honours shall
think it meet.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="220"/><anchor id="Pg220"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act against the Rebells in the
North and South.</hi></head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly considering the just sentence
pronounced against the principall Actors in that Rebellion
in the North and South, by ordinance of the Commissioners
of the late Assembly; And finding it most necessary,
that such as assisted or joyned with them in that impious and
unnaturall Fact, be likewise censured; Therefore ordains
Presbyteries and Synods <hi rend='italic'>respectivè</hi>, to proceed against them
with the highest Censures of the Kirk, if they give not satisfaction
by publick repentance; And when the sentence
of Excommunication shall be pronounced, The Assembly
discharges the said Judicatories to relax any of them from
the sentence, without the advice of the Generall Assembly,
or their Commissioners, <hi rend='italic'>nisi in extremis</hi>: To whom also the
saids Presbyteries and Synods, shall be answerable for their
diligence in the premisses as they shall be required. And
the Assembly doth humbly recommend to the Honourable
Estates of Parliament, to take such course as the Persons
that shall be found guilty may be exemplarly punished according
to the merit and degree of their offence.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act against secret disaffecters
of the Covenant</hi></head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly understanding that divers Persons
dis-affected to the Nationall Covenant of this Kirk,
and to the Solemne League and Covenant of the three Kingdoms,
do escape their just censure, either by their private
and unconstant abode in any one Congregation, or by secret
conveyance of their malignant speeches and practises; Therefore
ordains all Ministers to take speciall notice when any
such Person shall come within their Paroches, and so soon
as they shall know the same, that without delay they cause
warn them to appear before the Presbyteries within which
<pb n="221"/><anchor id="Pg221"/>
their Paroches lyes, or before the Commissioners of this
Assembly appointed for publick affairs, as they shall finde
most convenient, which warning the Assembly declares
shall be a sufficient citation unto them: And als that all Ministers
and Elders declare to the saids Judicatories <hi rend='italic'>respectivè</hi>,
every such disaffected person, although without their own
Paroch, so soon as they shall hear and be informed of them.
And the Assembly ordains the said Commissioners not only
to proceed to Tryal and Censure of such disaffected Persons,
but also take a special account of the diligence of Ministers,
Elders, and Presbyteries herein <hi rend='italic'>respectivè</hi>.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act for sending Ministers to the Armie.</hi></head>

<p>
The Assembly understanding that Ministers are not duly
sent forth to the Regiments of the Army, neither such as
are sent duly relieved, which neglect falleth out oftimes, by
reason of questions among Presbyteries interested in the Regiments:
Therefore for remedy hereof, thinks it convenient
that this order be keeped hereafter; That a List be
made of three Ministers by the Colonels, or in their absence
by the chief Officers of every Regiment, with advice
and consent of the Presbyterie at the Army, and sent to
Presbyteries here, or if the list be of Ministers in divers
Presbyteries to the Commissioners of the General Assembly,
that they may appoint one out of that list to be sent to the Regiment,
to attend them for performing Ministeriall duties
3 Moneths: And that the relief of Ministers already sent or
to be sent hereafter shall be in the same manner, And the
Assembly ordains Ministers who shall be thus appointed by
Presbyteries or the Commissioners of the Assembly <hi rend='italic'>respectivè</hi>,
to repair to the Armie with all diligence, under the paine
of suspension: And humbly recommends to the Honourable
Estates of Parliament, to provide some way whereby these
Ministers may have due and ready payment of their allowance,
from the time of their going from their charges here.
And it is declared that this order shall be also keeped for sending
forth of Ministers to the Regiments in the second expedition.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="222"/><anchor id="Pg222"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Renovation of the Commission for the
Publick affairs of the Kirk.</hi></head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly considering that the Commissioners
appointed by the last Assembly upon the ninteenth
day of August 1643. years, the last Session thereof
to sit at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, for the Publick affairs of the Kirk, have
not yet fully perfected that great Work for Unity of Religion,
and Uniformitie of Kirk-government in his Majesties
Dominions; And that now in respect of the present condition
of affairs in this Kingdome, their proceedings cannot
be examined at this time: Therefore finding it necessar
that the said Commission be renewed unto the Commissioners
therein mentioned, and to the Persons afternamed
now thought, fit to be added for the better expediting of
the businesse, Do hereby appoint the Persons particularly
nominate in the said Commission, <hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi>
Masters <hi rend='italic'>Andrew
Ramsay, Alexander Henderson, Robert Douglas, William Colvill,
William Bennet, George Gillespie, John Oiswald, Mungo
Law, John Adamson, John Sharp, James Sharp, William
Dalgleish, David Calderwood, Andrew Blackball, James Fleeming,
Robert Ker, John Mackenzie, Oliver Cole, Hugh Campbell, Adam
Penman, Richard Dickson, Andrew Stevinson, John Lawder,
Robert Blair, Samuel Rutherfurd, Arthur Mortoun, Robert
Traill, Frederick Carmichael, John Smith, Patrick Gillespie,
John Duncan, John Hume, Robert Knox, William Jameson,
Robert Murray, Henry Guthrie, James Hamilton,</hi> in <hi rend='italic'>Dumfreis,
Bernard Sanderson, John Levingstoun, James Bonar, Evan
Camron, David Dickson, Robort Bailzie, James Cuninghame,
George Youngh, Andrew Affleck, David Lindsay, Andrew Cant,
William Douglas, Murdo Mackenzie, Coline Mackenzie, John
Monroe, Walter Stuart</hi> Ministers; <hi rend='italic'>Archbald</hi> Marquesse of
<hi rend='italic'>Argyle, William</hi> Earle <hi rend='italic'>Marshall, John</hi>
Earle of <hi rend='italic'>Sutherland, Alexander</hi> Earle of
<hi rend='italic'>Eglingtoun, John</hi> Earle of <hi rend='italic'>Cassils,
Charles</hi> Earl of <hi rend='italic'>Dumfermeling,
John</hi> Earle of <hi rend='italic'>Lauderdale, John</hi> Earle of
<hi rend='italic'>Lindsay, James</hi> Earle of <hi rend='italic'>Queensberry,
William</hi> Earle of <hi rend='italic'>Dalhousie, Archbald</hi> Lord
<hi rend='italic'>Angus, James</hi> Vicount of <hi rend='italic'>Dudhope,
John</hi> Lord <hi rend='italic'>Maitland, David</hi> Lord <hi rend='italic'>Elcho,
John</hi> Lord <hi rend='italic'>Bahnerinoch, James</hi> Lord
<hi rend='italic'>Cowper</hi>, Sir <hi rend='italic'>Patrick Hepburne</hi> of
<pb n="223"/><anchor id="Pg223"/>
<hi rend='italic'>Waughtoun</hi>, Sir <hi rend='italic'>Archbald Johnstoun</hi> of
<hi rend='italic'>Waristoun</hi>, Sir <hi rend='italic'>David Hume</hi> of
<hi rend='italic'>Wedderburne</hi>, Sir <hi rend='italic'>Alexander Areskine</hi> of
<hi rend='italic'>Dun</hi>, Sir <hi rend='italic'>William Cockburne</hi> of
<hi rend='italic'>Langtoun</hi>, Sir <hi rend='italic'>Thomas Ruthven</hi> of
<hi rend='italic'>Frieland</hi>, Sir <hi rend='italic'>James Arnot</hi> of Fernie,
Sir <hi rend='italic'>Walter Riddall</hi> of that Ilk,
Sir <hi rend='italic'>Ledovick Houstoun</hi> of that Ilk,
Sir <hi rend='italic'>William Carmichael</hi> Fiar of that Ilk,
Mr <hi rend='italic'>George Douglas</hi> of <hi rend='italic'>Bonjedburgh</hi>,
Mr <hi rend='italic'>George Winrame</hi> of <hi rend='italic'>Libertoun</hi>,
Laird of <hi rend='italic'>Brodie</hi>, Sir <hi rend='italic'>John Smith,
James Dennistoun</hi>, Master <hi rend='italic'>Robert Barclay,
John Rutherford, William Glendunning, John Sempill, John Kennedy</hi> and Master
<hi rend='italic'>Alexander Douglas</hi> Elders: And also Masters,
<hi rend='italic'>David Dalgleish, Andrew Bennet, John Moncreiff, Alexander Carse,
Thomas Wilkie, James Gushrie, Henry Levingstoun, David
Drummond at Creiff, John Hay at Renfrew, John Strang, Richard
Inglis, William Falconer, John Paterson, Gilbert Rosse,
Richard Maitiand, George Cumming, William Campbel</hi> Ministers,
And <hi rend='italic'>William</hi> Earle of <hi rend='italic'>Glancairne,
William</hi> Earle of <hi rend='italic'>Louthian,
James</hi> Lord <hi rend='italic'>Murray</hi> of <hi rend='italic'>Gask,
John</hi> Lord <hi rend='italic'>Yester,
Robert Maitland, Frederick Lyon</hi> of <hi rend='italic'>Brigtoun, James Macdowell
of Garthland, David Beton of Creich</hi>, Sir <hi rend='italic'>James Stuart</hi>
Sheriff of <hi rend='italic'>Buit</hi>, Sir <hi rend='italic'>John Weemes</hi> of Bogie,
Mr <hi rend='italic'>William Sandilands</hi>
Tutor of <hi rend='italic'>Torphichin, Archbald Sydserfe, Laurence Henderson,
James Stuart, Thomas Paterson</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>Alexander Jaffrry</hi> Elders
now added by this Assembly, to meet at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi> upon the
fifth day of this instant moneth of June, and upon the last
Wednesday of August next, the last Wednesday of November
next, and upon the last Wednesday of February next;
and upon any other day, or in any other place they shall
think meet: Giving and granting unto them, or any fifteen
of them, there being twelve Minister present, full power
and commission to prosecute the said work of unitie in Religion,
and uniformitie of Kirk government in all his Majesties
Dominions, and to do and performe all things particularly
or generally contained in the said Commission of the
preceeding Assembly, or in an Act of the said Assembly upon
the said 19. day of August, intituled, <hi rend='italic'>A Reference to the
Commission anent the Persons designed to repair to the Kingdome of
England</hi>, and to treat and determine therin, and in all other
matters referred unto them by this Assembly, siclike,
and as freely, as if all these were herein expressed, and as
<pb n="224"/><anchor id="Pg224"/>
the persons nominat in that said former Commission might
have done by vertue of the said Act and former Commission
at any time by-gone, and with as ample power as any
Commission of former General Assemblies hath had, or been
in use of before, they being alwayes comptable and censurable
for their whole proceedings hereintill by the next
General Assembly.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Renovation of the Commission granted to the
Persons appointed to repair to the Kingdome
of</hi> England.</head>

<p>
The General Assembly, finding that the great Work of
unity in Religion, and uniformity of Kirk-government
in all his Majesties Dominions is not yet perfected, Do
therefore renew the Commission granted for that effect by
the preceeding Assembly, unto the Persons appointed to
repair to the Kingdome of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi> upon the 19. day of August
1643. in the last Session thereof, Giving and granting
to the Persons therin mentioned, the same power, to do all
and every thing particularly or generally contained in the
said Commission, in the same manner, and as fully, as
if the same were herein expressed, and as they might
have done at any time by gone by vertue of the former
Commission.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>The Assemblies answer to the Presbyterie
with the Armie.</hi></head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Reverend and loving Brethren in the LORD,</hi>
</p>

<p>
We received yours of the 17 and 20 of May, and were
much refreshed with the knowledge you gave unto us
therein, of your sense of our condition here, and of the
Lords dealing with yourselves there in your straits and difficulties:
<pb n="225"/><anchor id="Pg225"/>
We rejoyce exceedingly to see you make such a
blessed use of the Lords delayes, for your further Humiliation
and Dependence upon him: That Sanctuary, your
Enemies, and the Enemies of your GOD hath taken,
shall not save them: You have found by experience in
your marches and maintenance, that events are not ordered
by the propositions of men, but by the Providence and purpose
of GOD. There is a time for every purpose under
Heaven, and the Cup of the <hi rend='italic'>Amorites</hi> must be filled: Which
being now full of every abomination, yea of the blood of
the Saints, the cry whereof cannot but be heard in Heaven,
and answered on Earth, presageth no lesse to us, than that the
Lords time of his deliverance of his own, and destruction of
his Enemies draweth near.
</p>

<p>
We are not unsensible of your present estate, and by the
Lords grace shall be careful, both here and with our Congregations
at home, to make all take the same to heart. As
for our condition here remembred with such pious affection
by you, we doubt not but ye have heard what the Lord
hath done for us; these happy beginnings of the Lords
scattering our unnatural Enemies in the North, gives us confidence
of his assistance in the midst of difficulties against
these that assault us in the South: It is nothing with the
Lord to help whether with many, or with them that have no
power.
</p>

<p>
The security of this Nation indeed is great, it is our part
to blow the Trumpet to give warning to the People, and to
rouze them from that fearful condition which threatneth
so much desertion. And to this end we have injoyned a solemne
Fast, the causes whereof being more particularly considered
by our Commissioners here, will no question be sent
unto you, that if the Lord please, you may joyne with us
there in that Action.
</p>

<p>
We have set down an order to be kept hereafter, for sending
Ministers unto the Armie, which the Clerk will send
herewith unto you. Now the Lord our GOD, in whose
Name his people go forth against his Enemies, help and assist
them, and cover their heads in the Day of Battel, and be
<pb n="226"/><anchor id="Pg226"/>
their Refuge; and blesse your travels and endeavours, for the
good of their souls and his own glory.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, 3. June 1644.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Subscribed in name of the Generall Assembly by the
Moderator.</hi>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>4. <hi rend='italic'>June</hi> 1644. Sess 7.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>The Letter from the Commissioners at</hi>
London <hi rend='italic'>to the General Assembly.</hi></head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Right Honourable, Reverend and beloved in the LORD,</hi>
</p>

<p>
It was the earnest desire of our hearts to have come unto
you at this time, and to have brought with us the desireable
fruits of our weighty imployments and labours, to our
common rejoycing in the mids of so many troubles both
here and there: but our Lord in his wisedome hath not
judged it fitting, that this should be the time of our joyful
harvest, and of bringing our sheaves, to be matter of sacrifice
to himself, and of shouting to us. Both Nations as yet
do but go forth weeping and bearing their precious seed;
yet are we confident through JESUS CHRIST, that
as it is a seed time, if the Labourers (although other men
before us have laboured and we are entred into their labours)
prove faithful unto the end, the harvest shall come in due
time, and in great plenty.
</p>

<p>
The common Directory for publick Worship in the Kirks
of the three Kingdomes is so begun (which we did make
known to the Commissioners of the General Assembly) that
we could not think upon any particular Directory for our
own Kirk, and yet is not so far perfected, that wee could
present any part thereof unto your view: for although wee
have exhibited unto the Grand Committee (which is composed
of some of the Members of both Houses, and of the
Assembly, with our selves) the materials of the publick
<pb n="227"/><anchor id="Pg227"/>
prayers of the Kirk, the method of Preaching, and the
order of administration of both Sacraments, and have the
Catechisme in hand; yet are they not throughly examined
by the Committee, nor at all by the Assembly or Parliament,
which we cannot impute to any neglect or unwillingnesse,
but to the multiplicity and weight of their affairs,
by which they are sore pressed, and above their power.
</p>

<p>
The Directory for Ordination of Ministers (which upon
the extreme exigence of this Kirk was much pressed by the
Parliament) is agreed upon by the Committee and Assembly,
and some dayes past is presented to both Houses, but
hath not yet passed their Vote. The Assembly hath been
long in debate about the Officers and Government of the
Kirk (concerning which, we offered the two Papers
which wee drew up, according to the practice of our own,
and other Reformed Kirks, and so neere as we could conceive,
to the minde of the General Assembly, and did
send to the Commissioners of the General Assembly) and
hath passed many votes about the one and the other, but
hath turned their thoughts to such ripenesse and perfection,
that they could think upon the publishing of them,
or presenting them to your sight, nor is it in their power to
do so, without warrant of Parliament. Your wisedome
will consider that they are not a General Assembly, but
some select Persons, called by Authority to give their advice
in matters of Religion, that they walk in a way which
hath not been troden by this Nation before this time, that
many things seeme new unto them, and cannot obtain
their assent, till they see them clearly warranted by the Word
of GOD; That matters of the Government of the Kirk
have been much controverted here, and the prejudices against
Presbyteriall Government are many and great; That
the two extremes of Prelacie and Independencie, which
latter is the general claime of all Sects and Sectaries, have
prevailed most in this Kirk, and no other thing known by the
multitude but the one or the other; That such as look toward
the Government of the Reformed Kirks, finde a
mighty party within and without opposing them; And that
Reformation and Uniformitie must therefore be a work to
<pb n="228"/><anchor id="Pg228"/>
full of difficulty, that the hand of the most high GOD,
which is now begun to be streched out in this Land, must
bring it to passe.
</p>

<p>
There was also presented to the Assembly, a new Paraphrase
of the Psalmes in English Meeter, which was well
liked of, and commended by some of the Members of the
Assembly; But because we conceived that one Psalme Book
in all the three Kingdomes was a point of Uniformity much
to be desired, we took the boldnes (although we had no
such expresse and particular Commission) to oppose the
present allowing thereof, till the Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Scotland</hi> should be
acquainted with it; and therefore have we now sent an essay
thereof in some Psalmes. We have also sent another <hi rend='italic'>Specimen</hi>,
in Print, done by some Ministers of the City. Your
wisedome has to consider, whether it be meet to examine
them by your Commissioners there, that their judgements
be sent up unto the Assembly here, both about the generall
of Uniformity in this point, and about the particular way
of effecting it, whether by either of these two, or by any other
Paraphrase, or by changing some expressions in the
Books now in use, which is aymed at by the first of these
two.
</p>

<p>
As we cannot but admire the good hand of GOD in the
great things done here already, particularly; That the Covenant
(the foundation of the whole Work) is taken,
Prelacie and the whole train thereof, extirpated; The
Service-Book in many places forsaken, plain and powerful
preaching set up; Many Colledges in <hi rend='italic'>Cambridge</hi> provided
with such Ministers, as are most zealous of the best Reformation;
Altars removed; The Communion in some places
given at the Table with sitting; The great Organs at
<hi rend='italic'>Pauls</hi> and of <hi rend='italic'>Peters</hi>
in <hi rend='italic'>Westminster</hi> taken down; Images and
many other Monuments of idolatry defaced and abolished;
The Chappel-royal at <hi rend='italic'>Whitchal</hi> purged and reformed; and
all by authority in a quiet manner at noon day, without tumult:
So have we from so notable experience, joyned
with the promises of the Word sufficient ground of confidence
that GOD will perfect this Work against all opposition,
and of encouragement for us all to be faithfull in the
<pb n="229"/><anchor id="Pg229"/>
Work of God, which is carried on by his mighty Hand,
that no man can oppose it, but he must be seen fighting against
GOD, It is unto us no small matter of comfort,
that we have heard of no Minister of the Gospel (except
such as the Kirk hath rejected) joining with the Malignants
there, in their ungodly and unnaturall afflicting of that
Kingdome, while they are endeavouring the relief of the
afflicted in this Kingdome; and we pray and hope, that
they may carefully keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond
of peace, and walk worthy both of their holy calling, and
of the great Work, which the Lord is working by his own
weak servants in Kirk and Policy.
</p>

<p>
Be pleased to receive a Letter from the Assembly, unto
which you will return such an answer as shall seem good unto
your wisedome, and withall (which is our humble desire)
some word of your thankfull acknowledgement of the respect
and favours done by them unto us.
</p>

<p>
We have at all occasions since our coming hither, acquainted
the Commission with our proceedings, and by the
help of God, shall be industrious in obeying your directions
and theirs, during our abode here, which through the
power and blessing of God, bringing the affairs of his own
Church to a peaceable and blessed successe, wee wish may
be for a short time, and unto which your fervent prayers
through Christ maybe very effectuall, which therefore
is the humble and earnest desire of
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Worcester</hi> house,<lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>London</hi> May 20.
1644.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Your affectionate fellow-labouring and
fellow feeling Brethren in the Work
of the Lord.</hi>
</p>

<p>
JO. MAITLAND.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Alex Henderson. Sam. Rutherfurd.
Robert Baillie. George Gillespie.</hi>
</p>

</div>

<pb n="230"/><anchor id="Pg230"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>The Letter from the Synod of Divines
in the Kirk of</hi> England, <hi rend='italic'>to the
Generall Assembly.</hi></head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Right Honourable, right Reverend, and dearly beloved Brethren
in</hi> Jesus Christ,
</p>

<p>
The blessing and comfort of that inviolable Union
which our gracious GOD hath vouchsafed to both
Churches and Nations, gave us opportunity the last
year, to breath out some of our sighs into your compassionate
bosomes; And such have been the soundings of your
bowels, as have offered violence to Heaven by your effectuall
fervent prayers, and brought many sweet refreshing
to our languishing spirits by your pious and comfortable
Letters, in answer to ours.
</p>

<p>
This makes us studious of all means of acknowledging
your tender Sympathie, and of laying held on all opportunities
of repaying again to the same streams of consolation:
for which end, as we canno but confesse, that in the midst
of those boysterous waves wherein we have been daily tossed,
wee have met with many gracious and unexpected encouragements,
so we must needs renew our former mournings,
and rend our hearts afresh unto you, with greatest
instance for all the assistance that your Prayers, Tears,
Learning, Piety, and Largenesse of heart can possibly
contribute to your poor afflicted and still-conflicting Brethren:
And this we the rather beg of you, who, having
bin first in the furnace of affliction, and are come out of
great tribulation, are meetest to commiserate, and best
able to comfort others in any trouble, by the comforts
wherewith you your selves have been comforted of
GOD.
</p>

<p>
It was in our desires to have presented to your Venerable
Assembly, some of our dearest respects in writing, by that
eminently learned and much honored Commissioner of
yours, the Lord <hi rend='italic'>Waristoun</hi>: But his departure hence was
so sudden to us, and unexpected by us that we could not
<pb n="231"/><anchor id="Pg231"/>
have time (as his Lordship can inform you) to tender by
him such a testimony of our Brotherly &amp; intimate affections,
as may in some measure suite with your manifold and most
affectionate expressions toward us, when our sighings
were many, and our hearts faint: For such hath been
your love, that no waters can quench it, and such the undertakings
of the whole Kingdome of <hi rend='italic'>Scotland</hi> through
your furtherance, that we already begin to reap the fruits
of all that Piety, Prudence, and Valour, which at this day
render your Nation worthily renowned in the Christian
World; and us, exceedingly straitned and restlesse in our
selves, untill God please to open a way for our endeavours,
to make some more answerable returns.
</p>

<p>
Toward this, our thoughts and hopes were to have made,
ere now, some proceedings of our Assembly legible in
yours, But such are the continued distractions which lye upon
our spirits, by means of the sad and bleeding condition of
this Kingdome, as have cast us much behinde our own expectations,
and hindred that expedition which the necessities
of this Nation, and the desires of our Brethren abroad,
do earnestly call for at our hands.
</p>

<p>
Sometimes through GODS goodnesse wee have a prosperious
Gale, Sometimes againe, we saile like <hi rend='italic'>Paul</hi> and his
company, <hi rend='italic'>very slowly many dayes</hi>. And even then, when
wee draw near <hi rend='italic'>the fair Havens</hi>, some contrary Windes put us
out into the Deep again. We walk in paths that have hitherto
been untrodden by any Assembly in this Church: We
therefore are inforced to spend more time in our inquiries,
and in seeking of GOD a right way for us, that at length we
may put into that high way, the way of holinesse, wherein
Wayfaring men, though fools, shall not erre: And we
will wait upon our GOD (before whom we have been this
Day humbling of our souls) untill he lead us into all these
Truths which we seek after; and we shall labour to be yet
more vile in our own eyes, as finding by experience that it
is not in man to direct his way.
</p>

<p>
Those Winds which for a while do trouble the Aire, do
withall purge and refine it: And our trust is that through
the most wise Providence and blessing of GOD, the Truth
<pb n="232"/><anchor id="Pg232"/>
by our so long continued agitations, will be better cleared
among us, and so our service will prove more acceptable to
all the Churches of Christ, but more especially to you, while
we have an intentive eye to our peculiar Protestation, and
to that publick Sacred Covenant entred into by both the
Kingdomes, for Uniformity in all his Majesties Dominions.
</p>

<p>
Which Work we carry on (against what ever difficulties
are cast in our way) with more ease and comfort, by the
great sedulity and seasonable assistance wee daily receive
from your Noble and Reverend Commissioners sitting
among us: Their Prudence will (we doubt not) sufficiently
furnish you with more particular information touching
our affairs; And here, we cannot but acknowledge
that the assidious presence of these our learned and highly-esteemed
Brethren among us, and their free and faithfull
contributing of their counsels to us, doe oblige us much to
a double duty; the one of Thanks, which we now heartily
render to you, for sending to us such excellent Helpers;
the other of Request, which wee earnestly make
for their continuance with us, untill the Work bee brought
up to the finishing Cubite.
</p>

<p>
Now, the Great Master-Builder (without whose Almighty
concurrence, the Builders labour but in vain) accomplish
and perfect all his own glorious Work in your
hands, and in ours, also, to his own Glory, the peace and
edification of all the Churches, and the comfort of our selves
over all our travels and sufferings.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Westminster</hi>, May 17. 1644.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Your most affectionate Brethren and servants in the Lord, by the
direction, and in the Name of this whole Assembly,</hi>
</p>

<p>
William Twiffe, <hi rend='italic'>Prolocutor</hi>.<lb/>
Cornelius Burges, <hi rend='italic'>Assessor</hi>.<lb/>
Henry Robrough, <hi rend='italic'>Scriba</hi>.<lb/>
Adoniram Byfield, <hi rend='italic'>Scriba</hi>.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="233"/><anchor id="Pg233"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>The Generall Assemblies Answer to the right
Reverend the Assembly of Divines
in the Kirk of</hi> England.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Right Honourable, right Reverend, and most dearly
beloved in our Lord,</hi>
</p>

<p>
We do thankfully acknowledge your respectfull remembrance
of us by your Letters at all occasions; and not
a little rejoyce to see that happie correspondence and Christian
communion so sweetly entertained amongst us, which
is so acceptable in the sight of the Lord, so pleasant and
profitable, especially when kept and entertained betwixt
Kirks and Kingdomes about affairs of highest and most publick
concernment and interest: We have nothing more in
our desires than to entertain that harmonious correspondence,
that Christian sympathie and compassion, that
sounding and resounding of bowels, which well beseemeth
Kirks and Nations, United by a solemn League &amp; sacred Covenant,
for mutuall endeavours, by all lawfull means to a
further unitie in that Faith once delivered to the Saints,
and greater Uniformitie in Divine Worship, Discipline,
and Government, according to the Paterne.
</p>

<p>
The case and condition of your bleeding Kingdome
is no lesse sensible to us, than if our selves were in affliction
with you; but we trust all is working to your best,
and to our Lords glory: That some of you hes fallen, it
is to try you, purge you, and make you white: If
the Lord by those means be with that Reformation of
his Ordinances, bringing also alongst that other Reformation
of hearts and lives should it not be welcomed
with all joy, although it bee upon the expence of blood
and lives? The Lord will turn the bygone rage of Man to
his glory and your spiritual good the remnant of rage will
hee restraine. The Lord delivereth his owne by degrees,
<hi rend='italic'>he is with them in trouble, and delivereth them, and honoureth
them</hi>; He who hath been sensibly with you hitherto,
and upholden you in your trouble, will we trust, yet deliver
you, and honour you: The more ye sow in tears, the
greater shall be your harvest of peace and joy, when the
<pb n="234"/><anchor id="Pg234"/>
Lord according to the dayes wherein he hath afflicted you,
and the years wherein yee have seen evill, shall make you
glad, and his Work to appeare unto you, and his glory
unto your children, and the beautie of the Lord your God
to be upon you, and shall establish the work of your hands;
yea, even establish the work of your hands.
</p>

<p>
We should prove both unthankfull to God, and unfaithfull
to men, did wee not hold out unto you the Lords gracious
and powerfull dealing with us in the like condition,
and comfort you with the consolations wherewith wee our
selves have been comforted: We were involved in the like
difficulties; we had the strong opposition of highest Authoritie
set over two powerfull Kingdoms, beside this of ours;
and the unhappy providence of our wickedly wise and wary
Prelates, had done what in them lay, to make the Ministery
of this Land sworn Enemies to the intended Reformation:
So that we walked in a very wildernesse, in a labyrinth,
and as upon deep waters, wherein not onely did our
feet lose footing, but also our eyes all discovering or discerning
of any ground; yea; wee were ready to lose our
selves: Yet the Lord hath graciously rid us, and recovered
us out of all these difficulties, and set our feet upon a rock,
and ordered our goings. The experience wee have had in
our own persons, affoordeth us confidence and hope concerning
your affaires; and wee trust this hope shall not be
disappointed; it is our duety to hope upon experience, and
it is the Lords word and promise, that such an hope shall
not be ashamed. It cannot choose but beget confidence
in you, when ye shall consider, that ye have seen before your
eyes your neighboring Ship of this Kirk and Kingdome,
having (as it were) loosed from your side, in the like or
self-same storme, notwithstanding all tossing of windes and
waves, yet (<hi rend='italic'>not by might, nor by power, but by the Spirit of the
Lord of hosts</hi>) to have arrived safe and sound to the Port and
Harberie; yea, and to have dared to put out again unto the
storm, to contribute her weak endeavours for your help.
</p>

<p>
We acknowledge your impediments to be great and many,
the sufferings of your Brethren, the People of GOD,
cannot choose but both damp your spirits, and divide your
<pb n="235"/><anchor id="Pg235"/>
thoughts: Your walking in an untroden and unknown way,
must put you (though never so willing to go on speedily,
yet) to take time and leisure to ask for the right way, and
ye want nor the opposition of some amongst your selves, to
whom notwithstanding we trust the Lord will reveale his
truth in his own time. Never the lesse (much honoured
and dear Brethren) go on couragiously against the stream of
all opposition; every Mountain in the way of <hi rend='italic'>Zerubbabel</hi>,
the Lord shall make plain; and as many of you as are perfect,
be thus minded, that forgetting the things that are
behinde, and looking to the things that are before, you
presse hard towards the mark, as having before you, not
onely the prize of the high calling and recompence of reward,
but also at the end of this race, these two precious
Pearls and inestimable Jewels of Truth and Unity, and all
the Reformed Churches beholding and looking on, not
onely as witnesses, but also being ready to congratulate
and embrace you.
</p>

<p>
We were greatly refreshed to hear by Letters from our
Commissioners there with you, and by a more particular
relation from the Lord <hi rend='italic'>Waristoun</hi> now with us, of your
praise-worthy proceedings, and of the great good things the
Lord hath wrought among you and for you: Shall it seem a
small thing in our eyes, that the Covenant (the foundation
of the whole Work) is taken? That that Antichristian Prelacy
with all the traine thereof is extirpate? That the door
of a right entrie unto faithful Shepherds is opened; many
corruptions, as Altars, Images, and other Monuments
of Idolarry and Superstition removed, defaced and abolished;
the Service-book in many places forsaken, and plaine
and powerfull preaching set up; the great Organs at <hi rend='italic'>Pauls</hi>
and <hi rend='italic'>Peters</hi> taken down; That the Royal Chappell is purged
and reformed, Sacraments sincerely administrate, and according
to the paterne in the Mount, That your Colledges,
the Seminaries of your Kirk, are planted with able and sincere
Professors? That the good hand of GOD hath called
and kept together so many pious, grave, and learned Divines
for so long a time, and disposed their hearts to search
his Truth by their frequent Humiliations, continuall Prayers,
<pb n="236"/><anchor id="Pg236"/>
and learned and peaceable debates? Should not all and
each one of these stir up our souls to blesse the Lord, and
render both you and us confident, that he who hath begun
the good Work, will perfect it, and put the Copestone upon
it; That the beauty of a perfected Worke may shine to all
Nations, and we may say and shout, <hi rend='italic'>Grace, Grace, unto
it</hi>; That the time may be when full liberty and leasure
shall be to all the Builders of the House of GOD, to
give themselves with both their hands to the building up
and edifying the People of GOD in these things that belong
to life and Godlinesse, to the making of them wise to
salvation, and throughly furnished to every good work,
and when the Lord shall delight to dwell more familiarly,
and to work more powerfully in, and by his throughly purified
Ordinances? That you afflicted and tossed with
tempests and not comforted, shall have your stones laid
with fair Colours, your foundation with Saphires, your
Children shall be taught of GOD, and shall have great
peace, and no Weapon framed against you shall prosper, and
every tongue that riseth against you in Judgement shall bee
condemned; That the Lord will awake as in the ancient
dayes, as in the generation of old; That the Redeemed of
the Lord shall come unto Zion with singing, and sorrow and
mourning shall flee away.
</p>

<p>
And as we are confident that the Lord who heareth Prayer,
and hath promised to guide his Servants in all truth, will
bring your labours to a comfortable Conclusion: So do
all the Reformed Kirks, and the Kirk of Scotland above
all others extreamly long for the taste of the fruits of their
pious labours and continual pains: And so much the more,
that we have suspended some material determinations amongst
our selves, upon expectation of Uniformity; And
that in the meane time so many scandalous Papers come to
our view, and to the hands of the People here, for libertie
of Conscience, toleration of Sects, and such Practices as
are contrary to the Doctrine, Goverment, and Peace of
all the Reformed Kirks. For stopping and suppressing
whereof, as wee doubt not, but your wisedome, and the
Authority of the honourable Houses of Parliament will use
<pb n="237"/><anchor id="Pg237"/>
some more effectual means; So do we hope that your Determinations
shall carry such evidence of Divine Truth, and
demonstration of the Spirit, that those unhappy Clouds of
darknesse shall be so scattered, that they shall be no more
gathered nor appear hereafter, to the dishonour of God,
the prejudice of his Truth, and the scandalizing of so many
Souls for which Christ hath dyed.
</p>

<p>
We do with hearty thankfulnesse resent all the kindnesse
and respect you have shown to our Commissioners, and your
high esteeme of them in love for the Works sake; Although
their presence here would be very comfortable unto us,
very steedable to the publick, and necessar in respect of
their great and important particular charges and Stations;
yet do we willingly dispense with all, yea nothing shall be
too dear unto us, so that this Work be finished with joy,
and <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem made the glory and praise of the whole Earth: Because
of the house of the Lord our God we will feel her good: For our Brethren
and Companions sake, we will now say, Peace be within her
Walls, prosperity within her Palaces.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh 4 June 1644,</hi>
</p>

<p>
Subscribed in name of the Generall Assembly of the Kirk
of <hi rend='italic'>Scotland</hi>, by the Moderator of the Assembly.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>The Assemblies answer to their Commissioners
at</hi> London.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Reverend and Beloved Brethren,</hi>
</p>

<p>
It would have been the rejoycing of our hearts, and the
lightning of our countenances, to have seen your faces,
and injoyed your presence here with us, especially, should
yee have arrived unto us loaden with the spoils of Antichrist,
the Trophees of the Kirk of Christ, and the long
longed-for fruits of your painfull labours: But seeing
it hath pleased the Lord whose Interest in the businesse is
<pb n="238"/><anchor id="Pg238"/>
main and principall otherwise to dispose, it doth become
us with all humility to submit to his good pleasure, with
faith &amp; patience to attend his leasure, <hi rend='italic'>for he that beleeveth maketh
not haste</hi>, and with more frequency and fervencie in prayer
seek to him who will be sought for these things and having
<hi rend='italic'>begun the good work will perfect it</hi>, and double the benefit
by bestowing it in a more seasonable time unto us.
</p>

<p>
We have not been a little refreshed with your Letters sent
unto us and the Commissioners of the preceeding Assembly,
and with these from the Reverend Synod of Divines, the
answer whereof you will be pleased to present unto them:
by all which and more particularly by a full Relation from
the Lord <hi rend='italic'>Waristoun</hi> a faithfull witnesse and a fellow labourer
with you there, we see and acknowledge that by the Lords
blessing, the Progresse of the Work is already more, than
we can overtake in the course of our thankfulness; that
your labours are very great, your pains uncessant, your
thoughts of heart many, that ye endure the heat of the
day; but being confident of your patient continuance in
wel-doing, and that your labours shall not be in vaine in the
Lord, wee have renewed your Commission, and returned
the Lord <hi rend='italic'>Waristoun</hi> unto you, according to your desire,
that ye may prosecute that great Work which the Lord hath
blessed so farre in your hands.
</p>

<p>
When the Ordination and entry of Ministers shall be
conformable to the Ordinance of God, there is to be expected
a richer blessing shall be powred out from above, both
of furniture and assistance upon themselves, and of successe
upon their labours; for which end as our earnest desire is,
that the Directory for it may be established: so doe we exceedingly
long to see the common Directory for worship perfected,
which may prove an happy meane of that wished
for Uniformity in the Kirks of the three Kingdomes, shall
(we trust) direct by all Rocks of offence and occasions of
stumbling, and shall remove all these corruptions wherewith
the Lords sacrifice and service hath been defiled.
</p>

<p>
That point concerning a change of the Paraphrase of the
Psalmes in Meeter, we have referred to the Commissioners
here, whose power and Commission granted by the preceding
Assembly, we have renewed and continued. That
<pb n="239"/><anchor id="Pg239"/>
there be difficulties concerning Kirk-Government,
wee think it not strange for these reasons you lay our before
us; yet because the minds of men are still in suspense upon
the successe of the determination of that Reverend Assembly
on the one hand, and upon the successe of the Warre on the
other: which doth not a little faint their hearts and feeble
their hands, both you and we must be instant with God and
man for a finall determination of all these debates, and a
happy and speedy conclusion of this great affaire, so much
concerning his own glory and the good of his Kirk. <hi rend='italic'>Now
the Lord lead you in all truth, and give you understanding in all
things.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Edinburgh 4. June 1644.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Subscribed in name of the Generall
Assembly by the Moderator.</hi>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>The Assemblies Letter to the Kirks in
the</hi> Netherlands.</head>

<p>
Fratres in Domino plurimum colendi.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Quæ Anno superiore Ecclesiarum Zelandicarum nomine, missæ
sunt ad nos Literæ, ut eas communis totius Ecclesiæ vestræ
Religicæ voluntatis restes suisse interpretaremur, effecit benevolentia
vestra tot tantisque officiis nobis spectata: Quam sententiam
nobis confirmarunt ea quæ copiosè clarissimus Eques</hi> D. Archibadus
Jonsto nus Varistonus <hi rend='italic'>in soro supremo Judex, à reliquis
tum Ordinum cum Ecclesiæ hujus Regni Delegate</hi> Londine <hi rend='italic'>nonita
pridem remissus, in hac ipsa Synodo Nationali de eximio vestro
erga nos syudio commemoravit: Præfertim quanta fid, quam solicita
diligentia nofsram, vel Domini potius nostri Jesu Christi causam,
quæ nunc</hi> Londini <hi rend='italic'>agitur &amp; promoveriitis, &amp; promovers
etiamnum fatagatis. Quo in negotio, ex iis, quorum ab eo resitata
audivimus nomina, de propensa reliquorum voluntate &amp; cura,
ut conciliandæ Ecclesiarum Britannicarum unionis fæliciter
suscepta consilia, vestra ope &amp; opera prosperum mature fortiantur
exitum, minime obscura fecimus indicia. Sunt hæc tam illuseria
<pb n="240"/><anchor id="Pg240"/>
benevolentiæ vestræ testimonia, &amp; in omnium bonorum oculis adeo
perspicua ut eorum memoriam nulla unquam delere potuerint oblivia.
Laboris autem &amp; jam inpensi &amp; porrò suscepti ad controversias
in Synodo</hi> Londinensi <hi rend='italic'>suborientes fœliciter expediendas &amp; decidendas
nequando pœniteat ex eo quem per divinam jam benedictionem
fructum cepistis, optima quæque in posterum sperare consentaneum
est.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Huic tam honorifice beneficiorum vestrorum commemorationi à</hi>
D. Varistonio <hi rend='italic'>factæ supervenerunt ex partibus Hiberniæ aquilonaribus
Literæ multorum Chirographis subsignatæ; Qui singularis
gratiæ in illam Ecelesiam divinitus effusæ, ex quo tempore in societatem
fœderistrium unitorum sub Rege nostro Regnorum admissi sunt,</hi>
<q><hi rend='italic'>mentione facta, hujus inquiunt divinæ benedictionis amplissimum
nuper habuimus testimonium. Sanctorum in Belgio liberalitatem
eximiam; Qui nobis, ignotis licet &amp; poregrinis, fratres se
nostri amantissimos, &amp; malorum nostrorum sensu tenerrima
compunctos aperte demonstrârunt. Pauculos enim nos gladis
superstites, &amp; fame propediem interituros, omnibus extremis
circumventos, in ipso articulo sublevarunt: Nec tantum oratione
ad consolationum composita nobis animos confirmârunt, hortantes
ut humiliter incedentes Deum liberatorem expectemus,
qui non nisi ad breve tempus aciem suam à domo</hi> Jacob <hi rend='italic'>abscondere
solet, sed subsidio insuper opulento cum annonæ tum aliarum
rerum ad nostram intantis angustis relaxationem &amp; solatium
necessarium copiose nos refocillârunt. Tantum munificentiam
cum supplices a Deo contendimus, ut septuplam ipsis in
sinum rependat tum demisse vos etiam atque etiam rogamus ut
in tanti beneficii agnitione Ecclesiis Belgicis, nobi eum gratias
agatis. Hæc illi. In quo quidem officio si illis desimus, in nos
pariter &amp; illos graviter peccemus.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Agnoscimus igitur illustrissimorum &amp; potentissimorum</hi>
Hollandiæ, Zelandiæ, <hi rend='italic'>aliorumque Ordinum</hi> Belgicorum
<hi rend='italic'>tam eximiam beneficenciam: Quibus non conniventibus modo &amp;
permittentibus (quod ipsum non vulgare beneficium habendum esset) sed
authoribus etiam modumque &amp; rationem ræscribentibus, exemplo
qnoque præunitibus in subsidium fratrum nostrorum</hi> Hiberne
<hi rend='italic'>collecta per Ecclesias facta ad ipsos mature deportata sit:
Agnoscimus piorum in iisdem Ecclesiis Belgicis tam expromptam: volantatem
&amp; liberalitatem; tantum beneficium non in
<pb n="241"/><anchor id="Pg241"/>
ipsos magis fratres nostres, quam in illorum persona in nosinet ipsos
esse collatum: Vosque (fratres Reverendi) obnixè rogatos volumus,
ut quemadmodum nos ad omnem grati animi significationem
prompti semper erimus, ita quâ potissimum ratione commodum
videbitur, illustrissimis &amp; potentissimis Ordinibus nostre
nomine gratias agatis populo autem Christiano curæ vestræ commisso
tum publice universo, tum privatim singulis, ut occasio tulerit,
demonstretis quam honorifice de ipsis sentiamus, &amp; quanti faciamus
tam eximiam benevolentiam &amp; charitatem, quâ in Ecclesiarum</hi>
Hibernicarum <hi rend='italic'>consolatione viscera nostra refocillaverunt. Quæ
autem vestræ fuerint partes, fratres charissimi, quam pio studio
&amp; labore, quam assidua diligentia tantæ charitatis semen in segetem
&amp; maturam tandem messem provexeritis, cum nos libentes agnoscimus,
tum res ipsa loquitur, &amp; fructus opimus abunde testatur.
Inprimis autem (quod caput est) tantæ gratiæ authorem
&amp; largitorem nos una cum Ecclesiis</hi> Hibernicis <hi rend='italic'>laudamus &amp;
celebramus: comprecantes ut in vos universos, in Ecclesias a Domino
vobis commissas, in illustrissimos</hi> Belgii <hi rend='italic'>vestri Ordines Spiritum
suum copiose effundat, ut quemadmodum in Rep. vestra adversus
hostem potentissimum defendenda, &amp; inter tantas bellorum
moles indies amplificanda, in Evangelii luce &amp; veritate incontaminatâ
contra inferorum portas in vestris Ecclesiis propugnandâ,
atque inde latius propagandâ, immensa Dei vobis excubantis potentia,
multiformis sapientia, &amp; eximia beneficentia, per universum
terrarum orbem hactenus celebrata est; ita bonis omnibus
vos deinceps cumulare pergat idem fons omnis bonitatis, ut
frementibus religionis &amp; libertatis vestræ hostibus, sapientiæ &amp;
optimarum artium juxta ac armorum triumphorumque gloriâ inter
nobilissimas gentes Resp. vestra fœderata quotidie magis emineat,
Ecclesia sacrorum puritate, &amp; cælestis veritatis splendore perspicua
refulgeat; eoque prosperè vobis cedant vestra prudentissima &amp;
saluberrima consilia, quibus certissimum ad fælicitatem publicam
compendium vos capessure demonstratis, nec vobis tantum consulitis,
sed de vicinis etiam Ecclesiis soliciti, quâ operâ, quâ consilio
opibusque vestris eas sublevatis &amp; confirmatis omnes, &amp; quasi
de specula unversis prospicientes de periculis imminentibus commonefacitis,
&amp; ad ruinam ab hostibus dolosè machinatam maturè
precavendam armatis.</hi>
</p>

<pb n="242"/><anchor id="Pg242"/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Ergo quod anno superiori, veluti signo dato, Reformatas omnes
Ecclesias, missis ex</hi> Zelandia <hi rend='italic'>literis commonuistis, ut cum
impostores</hi>, Jesu <hi rend='italic'>nomen impudenter ementiti, cæterique Antichristi
satellites, quo securius in populum erroribus Pontificiis fascinatum
grassari, &amp; puriores Christi Ecclesias funditus extirpare queant,
arctissimâ conjuratione Sociati ad impia consilia patranda
sese accinxerunt, Ita Ecclesiæ quoque Reformatæ sine mora consilia
in medium alacriter conferant, &amp; animos ac vires conjungant,
ut perniciem sibi omnibus intentatam in hostium capita retorqueant:
ni fecerint, tam pudendæ ignaviæ excusatione apud posteritatem
carituri: consilium non minus prudens &amp; fidum, quam fælix &amp;
salutare libenter &amp; tum agnovimus &amp; nunc ipso etiam eventu comprobamus.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Principio autem ad hoc consequendum necessarium videtur, ut
sine morâ convolemus omnes ad Deum nostrum clementissimum,
qui postquam Ecclesiarum Reformatarum mores minimè reformatos
multis annis longanimitate suâ pertulisset, ferulam primum, mox
etiam gladium vibratum interminata, tandem rubentem &amp; madidum
suorumque sanguine calentem &amp; spumantem per regiones
plurimas jam diu circumtulis; in nos denique reliquos nunc intentat,
nisi mature resipuerimus, &amp; de domo ipsius amplius purgandâ, de
gratia Domini nostri</hi> Jesu Christi<hi rend='italic'> pluris facienda, de cultu Dei
ipsiusque institutis religiosius habendis, de Sabbatho ejus sanctificando,
a quo nimium oculos nostros avertimus, &amp; de moribus ad
pietatis normam componendis magis serio quam hactenus a nobis
factum est, nobiscum statuentes cum populo Dei sub</hi> Nehemia,
Josia, <hi rend='italic'>reliquisque piis Gubernatoribus, religioso fœdere percusso,
tanquam firmissimo vinculo Deo obstricti, nos internes arctius adversus
hostes univerimus, ut avertat Deus jam fumantem &amp; capitibus
nostris imminentem iram, quam peccata nostra plurima &amp;
maxima adversus nos prevocerunt &amp; accenderunt.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Non tantum nobis deferimus, nondum eos renovato cum Deo
fœdere, &amp; votis nuncupatis dignos edidimus fructus, ut nostrum
exemplum vobis proponere libeat: Quod tamen experti fumus, de
Dei erga nos gratia, quod gratitudo erga Deum, quod gloria ipsius
a nobis flagitat, celare non audemus. Quecunque nostra male merita
sunt in conspectu Dei &amp; hominum; certe ex quo die nos de religìoso
fœdere cum Deo &amp; inter nos ineundo cogitavimus, a portis
inferorum revocari, &amp; res nostræ omnes in Deum nostrum necessario
<pb n="243"/><anchor id="Pg243"/>
conjectæ melius habere cæperunt, &amp; fæliciore hactenus
successu processerunt. Quod si de fœderis huiusmodi religiosa societate
cocunda (quod rerum veltrarum &amp; Religionis in</hi> Britannia
<hi rend='italic'>nostra ex fœdere nuper inito perpurgandæ &amp; stabilandæ commodo
fieri possit) vestræ prudentiæ visum fuerit cogitare, &amp; ex consilio
eorum quorum interest statuere, ac eum aliis Reformatis Ecclesiis
agere (proea qua apud omnes valetis gratia) ut eandem
vobiscum ineant rationem, non dubium est, per Domini ac Dei
nostri benignissimi</hi> Jesu Christi <hi rend='italic'>in Ecclesias suas gratiam, fore,
ut non modo, quod certissimum adversus impendentia mala persugium
anno superiore missis ex</hi> Zelandia <hi rend='italic'>literis denunciastis: Ecclesiæ
Reformatæ arctioris Societatis vinculo inter se unita ad hostium
conatus impetusque frangendos corroberentur &amp; confirmantur;
sed disiecti etiam lapides Domus Dei per</hi> Germaniam <hi rend='italic'>ex rudere &amp;
cineribus ridevivi recolligantur, ac gloriosum Domini nostri Templum
ibidem instauretur: &amp; purioris Religionis Professores in istis
Ecclesiis, per resipiscentiam ad eum qui percussit eos, reversi, &amp;
quod nullis canescat sæculis fœdere, Domino nobiscum coadunati,
malis, sub quorum pondere tot annos gemiscunt, tandem subleventur.
Qui Dies longe optatissimus si per Dei gratiam semel illuxerit:
de consiliorum communione inter Reformatarum Ecclesiarum
Synodos per Legatos &amp; Literas concilianda redivivi possit ratio,
per quam Ecclesiæ hostes compescantur, hæreses opprimantur,
&amp; schismata retarciantur, pax cum Deo &amp; inter Ecclesias firma
conservetur, &amp; gloriosum Dei opus in Evangelio per orbem terrarum
propagando, &amp; Antichristi regno abolendo promoveatur.
Quod ut optandum, &amp; sperandum, piis &amp; prudentibus vestris
meditationibus, ut bonnum semen fæcundissimo solo commendamus.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Edinburgi.</hi> 4 Junii 1644.
</p>

<p>
Vestræ Dignitati &amp; Fraternitati addictissimi, Pastores
&amp; Seniores Nationalis Synodi Scoticanæ, &amp;c.
nostro omnium nomine ac mandato.
</p>

<p>
DIRECT.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Ecclesiis Dei, qua sunt in unitis
Hollandiæ, Zelandiæ, aliisque
fœderati</hi> Belgii <hi rend='italic'>Provinciis.</hi>
</p>

</div>

<pb n="244"/><anchor id="Pg244"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Ordinance concerning Bursars.</hi></head>

<p>
The Assembly understanding that the Overture for
maintaining Bursars, in the Assembly holden in the
year 1641. upon the 7. of August, Sess. 15 is never yet
put in practice: Do therefore Ordain Presbyteries to put
the same in practice with all diligence, and to make account
thereof to the next Assembly.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Ordinance for up lifting and imploying
Penalties contained in Acts of Parliament,
upon pious uses.</hi></head>

<p>
The Assembly understanding that the executing of
some laudable Acts of Parliament, made against
Non-Communicants and Excommunicate persons,
and of divers other Acts containing pecuniall pains for restraining
of Vice, and advancing Piety, is much neglected
by the slownesse of Presbyteries and Ministers, in seeking
Execution thereof: Therefore ordains Presbyteries and
Ministers <hi rend='italic'>respectivè</hi>, to be diligent hereafter by all means,
in prosecuting full and exact Execution of all such Acts of
Parliament, for lifting the saids Penalties contained
in the same, and for faithfull imployment thereof, upon
pious uses, and that every Presbyterie report their diligence
herein yearly to Generall Assemblies.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>An Overture concerning Promises of Marriage
made by Minors, to those with whom they
have committed Fornication.</hi></head>

<p>
Forsameikle as it is found by experience, that some young
men being put to Colledges by their wel-affected Parents,
<pb n="245"/><anchor id="Pg245"/>
that they may be instructed in the knowledge of Arts
and Sciences, to the intent they may bee more able for publick
Imployments in the Ecclesiastick and Civill state,
that the said Children hes committed Fornication. And
the Woman and her friends hes seduced the foresaid Schollers
being Minors, to make promise of Marriage to the
party with whom they have committed Fornication; And
thereupon intends to get the benefite of Marriage with the
said young men, not onely without the consent of their
Parents, but to their great grief, and to the great appearance
of the ruine and overthrow of their estate: Which
may be the case of Noblemen and Gentlemens children, as
welas of these of other estates and degrees within the Kingdom.
Wherefore if the Assembly think it expedient, it
would be declared that all such promises be made null and
of none effect, especially where the maker of the promise
is Minor, and not willing to observe the samine; because
his Parents will not consent, but oppose and contradict,
threatning to make him lose not onely his favour but both
blessing and birth-right. This Ordinance shal not onely
be very expedient for many good civill causes, but is very
consonant and agreeable to the Word of God, and will be
very comfortable to many Godly Parents, who otherwise
may be disappointed of their pious intentions, and
have the comfort they expected, turned to an heavy and
grievous crosse.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Generall Assembly thinks it convenient at this time to delay any
determination in the matter above-written untill the next assembly,
That in the meane time every Presbterie may take the
same to their serious consideration, and report their judgements
to the Assembly.</hi>
</p>

</div>

<pb n="246"/><anchor id="Pg246"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act concerning dissenting voices in
Presbyteries and Synods.</hi></head>

<p>
The Assembly thinks it necessar, if any Member of
Presbyteries or Synods shall finde in matters depending
before them, that the Moderator shall refuse to put any
thing of importance to voices; Or if they finde any thing
carried by plurality of voices to any determination which
they conceive to be contrary to the Word of God, the Acts
of Assembly, or to the received order of this Kirk, That
in either of these cases they urge their dissent to be marked
in the Register; And if that be refused, that they protest
as they would desire to be free of common censure with
the rest: And the Assembly declares the dissenters to be
censurable, if their dissent shall be found otherwise nor
they conceived.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act concerning the Election of a Moderator
in Provinciall Assemblies.</hi></head>

<p>
The General Assembly understanding that some Provincial
Assemblies in choosing their Moderator, tye themselves
to these Persons who have been before named and designed
in particular Presbyteries, which is against the libertie
of the Provincial Assembly: Therefore discharges
Presbyteries to make any such nomination hereafter; And
ordain Provincials in their first meeting, to elect their Moderator,
and to make their own List for that effect without
any such prælimitation.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="247"/><anchor id="Pg247"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act for keeping of the Fast by the Congregations
in the Towne where the
Assembly holds.</hi></head>

<p>
The Assembly judge it most necessar and comely, seeing
the first day of the meeting of Generall Assemblies,
is by the laudable practice of this Kirk a day of Fasting and
Humiliation, for craving the Lords blessing to that Meeting;
That not onely the Members of the Assembly, but
that all the Congregations also of the Town where the Assembly
holds bee so exercised: And that publick Worship
bee in all the Kirks thereof that day for that effect.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>Meeting announcement.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Generall Assembly appoints the meeting of the
next Assembly, to be upon the last Thursday of May,
in the Yeer 1645. at</hi> Edinburgh.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="248"/><anchor id="Pg248"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Right Honourable, Reverend, and beloved in the Lord,</hi>
</p>

<p>
As we are not without the knowledge, so are we
not without the feeling of the distresses of our
Native Countrey, and of the troubles of our
dear Brethren, specially that the hand of the
Lord is stretched out against you, not only by Invasion
from without of the basest of the children of men, but also
by the unnatural treachery of some within; who have dealt
perfidiously in the Covenant and Cause of God: <hi rend='italic'>They hisse
and gnash the teeth; they say, Wee have swallowed her up: certainly
this is the day that wee looked for: Wee have found, wee
have seen it; the Lord hath caused thine Enemy to rejoice over
thee, he hath set up the horn of thine Adversaries:</hi> Yet (saith
the Lord, who is thy Maker and thy Husband, <hi rend='italic'>the Lord of
hosts is his name, and thy Redeemer the holy One of Israel) for a
<pb n="249"/><anchor id="Pg249"/>
small moment have I forsaken thee, but with great mercies will I
gather thee. In a little wrath I hide my face from thee, for a
moment; but with everlasting kindnesse will I have mercy on thee:
For this is as the waters of Noah, the Covenant of my peace shall
not be removed, saith the Lord that hath mercy on thee.</hi> When
the foundation of the House of the Lord was laid, the
Priests and Levites sung together in praising and giving thanks
to the Lord; <hi rend='italic'>Because he is good, for his mercy endureth for
ever,</hi> And we hope at this time upon the coming of our reverend
Brethren, and the sight of that which they bring
with them, the noise of the shout of joy; shall be louder
then the noise of the weeping of the People. This we may
say, that not many years ago many of us would have been
content to have losed our lives, that we might have obtained
that which the Lord, if not in a miraculous, yet in a marvellous
and merciful providence, hath brought to passe in this
Iland, in these dayes, which many before us, have desired to
see, &amp; have not seen. God forbid that it should seeme a small
thing in your eyes which is done here already, as it is expressed
in a Paper from the Parliament, and Letters from
the Assembly. Ye are best acquainted with the tentations
and difficulties which ye meet with there, which are also
very sensible unto us; And when we consider how the
Lord hath carried on his work here at the first taking of the
Covenant, and since, against much learning and contradiction,
against much Policie, power, and all sorts of opposition
(such as Reformation useth to encounter) we are
ravished with admiration of the right hand of the Almighty.
For our part, we may confidently avouch in the sight of
GOD and before you, whom next unto GOD we do
respect and reverence, and to whom as your servants we
are accomptable, that in all our proceedings we had first
of all the word of GOD before our eyes for the Rule; and
for our Patern the Church of <hi rend='italic'>Scotland</hi>, so much as was possible;
and no lesse (if not more) then if all this time since
we parted from you, we had been sitting in a National Assembly
there, and debating matters with our Brethren at
home: Where we were not able to get every thing framed
to our minde, we have endeavoured as much as we could,
<pb n="250"/><anchor id="Pg250"/>
to preserve our own Reformation and practice, of which
our Brethren will give you accompt in the particulars, we
hope, to your satisfaction. That an Uniformitie in every
thing is not obtained in the beginning, let it not seem
strange; The levelling of the high Mountain of Prelacie,
The laying aside of the Book of Common Prayer, The Directory
of Worship concluded in both Houses of Parliament,
and the principall Propositions of Church-government passed
in the Assembly, all of them according to the solemne
League and Covenant, the greatest of all, are three or foure
witnesses to prove, that the Lord hath done great things for
us, whereof we are glad, and which make us <hi rend='italic'>like them that
dream</hi>: And we are sure, that not onely the Reformed
Kirks, but the Papists will say, The Lord hath done great
things for them.
</p>

<p>
All that we desire, is: 1. That the Directory of Worship
may be returned by our Brethren with all possible expedition,
that it may be published here, and put in practise,
as that which is extreamely longed for by the good People,
and will be a remedy of the many differences and divisions about
the Worship of God in this Kingdome, esspecially in
this place: If there be any thing in it that displeaseth, let it
be remonstrate upon irrefragable and convincing reason, otherwise
ye will in your wisedome give approbation to it.
2. If there be any particular differences among some Brethren;
which are not determined, but passed over in silence
in the Directory, and yet hinted at in the Letter from
the Assembly, we hope that in your wisedome ye will so
consider of them, that they may be layde aside in due time,
and that in the mean while, till the Directory be concluded
and put in practice, there be no trouble about them, for
that were as Snow in Summer, and as Rain in Harvest. We
know nothing of that kinde, that all of us who love Unitie,
Order, and Edification, may not perfectly agree in, without
scandall or disturbance: And we beseech the Lord to
keep that Kirk free of such Sects and Monsters of opinions,
as are daily set on foot and multiplied in this Kingdome,
through the want of that Church-government by Assemblies,
which hath preserved us, and we hope, through the
<pb n="251"/><anchor id="Pg251"/>
blessing of God, shall cure them. 3. Because Nationall
Assemblies cannot frequently conveene, we humbly desire,
that such a Commission may be settled as we may at all occasions
till the Work be finished, have our recourse unto, for
our direction and resolution: for we know both our own
weaknesse: and the greatnesse of the Work: wherein we
can promise no more but to be faithfull in obeying your
commandments, as in the sight of God, whom with our
Souls we pray, to grant you his Spirit, to guide you into
all truth, And thus continue.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Worcester house, Jan. 6. 1646.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Your humble and faithfull Servants.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Subscrib.</hi><lb/>
Alex. Henderson.<lb/>
Jo. Maitland.<lb/>
Sam. Rutherfurd.
</p>

<p>
DIRECT.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>For the Right Reverend the Generall
Assembly of the Kirk
of</hi> Scotland.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>The Letter from the Synode of Divines in</hi>
England, <hi rend='italic'>to the Generall Assembly.</hi></head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Right honourable, right reverend, and dearly beloved
in the LORD JESUS,</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>As cold waters to a thirsty soul, so is good news from a far
Countrey.</hi>
We your Brethren, yet remaining in the Furnace of affliction,
and still labouring in the very fire, Have at length,
by the good Hand of GOD upon us, attained so far toward
the Mark at which we all aime, that we shall now send
you, by two of your Reverend and Faithful Commissioners
Mr <hi rend='italic'>Robert Bailie</hi>, and
Mr <hi rend='italic'>George Gillespie</hi> (our much honoured
Brethren) some good news of that great Work, after
which your zeal for Truth and Peace hath so much thirsted,
and for which you <hi rend='italic'>have not loved your lives unto the death.</hi>
</p>

<pb n="252"/><anchor id="Pg252"/>

<p>
Our progresse therein hath not been so expeditious as was
desired and expected. This, unto such as either know
not, or consider not, The weight and greatnesse of the
Work, nor The manifold difficulties which have occurred
to obstruct our proceedings in this day of darknesse and calamity
(too sad to be expressed) hath been like unto <hi rend='italic'>hope
deferred</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>which makes the</hi> heart sick: Howbeit, we trust,
<hi rend='italic'>That when their desire</hi> (namely that which we have prepared,
and are further in travell with) <hi rend='italic'>shall come</hi>
unto them, <hi rend='italic'>It will
be</hi>, through God, <hi rend='italic'>a Tree of life</hi>, as to our great comfort
and encouragement, we already perceive it to be to both
the honourable Houses of Parliament.
</p>

<p>
Touching this severall Papers brought to us from your
Honourable and Reverend Commissioners, by the hands of
the Committee appointed to treat with them in matters of
Religion (one of the Papers, being given in the 10. of
November 1643. Concerneth the severall sorts of Church-officers
and Assemblies: Another, bearing date the 24. of
January 1643. Concerneth Congregationall Elderships, and
Classicall Presbyteries: The other, being presented the
15. of August last, representeth the necessity of making
greater speed in settling the intended Uniformity in Religion,
according to the late solemne Covenant:) We hold it our
duty, in regard both of the act and inseparable Union,
which the Lord hath happily and seasonably made between
you and us, and of your indefatigable and inestimable labour
of love to this afflicted Kingdom, to give your Lordships
and the rest of that Venerable Assembly, some brief
account.
</p>

<p>
Concerning one Confession of Faith, and Forme of Catechisme,
we make no question of a blessed and perfect harmony
with you. The publick Doctrine, held out by our
Church to all the World (especially when it shall be reviewed,
which is in great part done) concurring so much
with yours, may assure you of your hearts desire in those
particulars, so soon as time and opportunity may give us
liberty to perfect what we have begun.
</p>

<p>
The chief reason of laying aside the review of our publick
Doctrine, after the happy and much desired arrivall of your
<pb n="253"/><anchor id="Pg253"/>
Reverend Commissioners here, was, The drawing up and
accelerating of a Directory for Worship, and of a Forme
of Church-Government; in both of which we stood at a
greater distance from other Reformed Churches of Christ,
and particularly from yours (which we very much honour)
with whom our solemne sacred Nationall Covenant requireth
us to endeavour the nearest Conjunction and Uniformity,
that we and our posterity after us, may as Brethren live in
Faith and Love, and the Lord may delight to dwell in the
midst of us.
</p>

<p>
Nor have our labours there in been frustrate: For we
have perfected and transmitted a Directory for Worship,
to both Houses of Parliament; where it hath received such
acceptance, that it is now passed in both the Honourable
Houses of Parliament; which we hope will be to the joy
and comfort of all our godly and dear Brethren in all His
Majesties Kingdoms and Dominions.
</p>

<p>
We have not advised any imposition which might make it
unlawfull to vary from it in any thing; Yet we hope, all
our Reverend Brethren in this Kingdom, and in yours also,
will so far value and reverence that which upon so long debate
and serious deliberation hath been agreed upon in this
Assembly (when it shall also passe with you, and be settled
as the common publick Directory for all the Churches in
the three Kingdomes) that it shall not be the lesse regarded
and observed. And albeit we have not expressed in the Directory
every minute particular, which is or might be either
laid aside or retained among us, as comely and usefull in
practice; yet we trust&mdash;that none will be so tenacious of
old customs not expressely forbidden, or so averse from
good examples although new, in matters of lesser consequence,
as to insist upon their liberty of retaining the one,
or refusing the other, because not specified in the Directory;
but be studious to please others rather then themselves.
</p>

<p>
We have likewise spent divers moneths in the search of
the Scriptures, to finde out the minde of Christ concerning
a Forme of Church-government, wherein we could not
but expect the greatest difficulty: For our better Progresse
herein, wee have with all respect considered the severall
<pb n="254"/><anchor id="Pg254"/>
Papers of your Honourable and Reverend Commissioners,
touching this Head; and do with all thankfulnesse, acknowledge
their great zeal, judgement, and wisdom expressed
therein (as also, the excellent assistance and great furtherance
of your Reverend Commissioners in this great
Work; which now, through GODS goodnesse, is very
near to a period also).
</p>

<p>
In pursuit whereof, we made a strict survey and scrutinie
of every Proposition, that we might finde it agreeable to,
and warranted by the Word of God, in a method of our
own; without resting upon any particular modell or frame
whatsoever already constituted: What we have performed,
and how farre we have proceeded therein, we leave to the
information of your Reverend Commissioners, who have
been eye and ear witnesses of all that hath past, and we
doubt not but you will shortly receive a satisfactory answer
from hence, so soon as it shall be passed in the Honourable
Houses of Parliament.
</p>

<p>
And now, Right Honourable, and right Reverend
Brethren, let it not seem grievous that we have this long delayed
the satisfying of your earnest and just expectation: It is the
Lot of Jerusalem, to have her Wals built in troublous
times, when there are many adversaries. Nor let it
offend, that (albeit we acknowledge the many, great,
and inestimable expressions of your love zeal, and helpfulnesse
unto us every way in the day of our distresse, to be
beyond all that we can in words acknowledge) we professe
plainly to you, That we do most unwillingly part with
those our Reverend and dear Fellow-labourers, your
Commissioners, whom now you have called home, to
render an account of their imployment here; which hath
been so managed both by them and the rest of their Honourable
and Reverend Colleagues, as deserveth many thanks,
and all Honourable acknowledgement, not onely from us,
but from you also.
</p>

<p>
Give us leave to adde, that the long experience we have
had of the great sufficiency, integrity, and usefulnesse of
them all, in the great Work of Christ our common Lord
and Master, inforceth us (next to our greatest sute, continuance
<pb n="255"/><anchor id="Pg255"/>
of your fervent prayers) to be earnest suiters, not
onely for the continuance of these excellent helpers, Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>Alex Henderson</hi>, and Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Sam. Rutherfurd</hi>,
yet remaining with us, but also for the speedy return hither of our Reverend
Brethren that are now going hence, for the perfecting
of that Work which yet remains. And this sute we
trust, you will the rather grant, because of the great and
joint concernment of both Churches and Kingdoms in these
matters.
</p>

<p>
Now the spirit of wisdom and of all grace rest upon you
in all your great consultations, as at all times, so especially
now when you shall be gathered together in the Name of
the Lord Jesus, for the further building up and polishing
of his Church; and cause the fruit of all your labour to be
to the praise and glory of GOD, and the comfort and rejoycing
of the hearts of all <hi rend='italic'>the Israel of God</hi>: He reward all
our dear Brethren of that Sister Church and Nation manifold
into their bosome, all the labours, love, and sufferings
which they have afforded, and still do, cheerfully
continue, for our sakes and the Gospels, in this distracted
and bleeding Kingdom; suppresse all commotions and
bloody practices of the common Enemy, in both, yea in
all the three Kingdoms; set up the Throne of Jesus Christ,
and make all the Kingdoms to be the Lords, and our Jerusalem
to be a praise upon Earth, that all that love her and
mourn for her, may rejoyce for joy with her, and may suck
and be satisfied with the breasts of her consolation.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Westminster, Jan 6. 1644.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Subscribed by <hi rend='italic'>Your most loving Brethren, and fellow labourers
in the Work of the Lord, in the name of this whole Assembly,</hi>
</p>

<p>
William Twisse, <hi rend='italic'>Prolocutor</hi>.<lb/>
Cornelius Burges, <hi rend='italic'>Assessor</hi>.<lb/>
John White, <hi rend='italic'>Assessor</hi>.<lb/>
Henry Robrough, <hi rend='italic'>Scriba</hi>.<lb/>
Adoniram Byfield, <hi rend='italic'>Scriba</hi>.
</p>

<p>
DIRECT.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>To the Right Honourable, and right Reverend, the Generall Assembly
of the Church of</hi> Scotland, <hi rend='italic'>these presents</hi>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n="256"/><anchor id="Pg256"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>28 Jan. 1645. Post meridiem. Die Martis.</hi> Sess. 5.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Approbation of the Proceedings of the
Commission of the two preceding
Assemblies.</hi></head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly, having heard the report of the
Committee appointed to consider and examine the
Proceedings of the Commissioners of the two last Generall
Assemblies, <hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi> Of the Assemblies held in Edinburgh in
the yeers 1643 and 1644. And after mature deliberation,
and serious consideration thereof, Finding that the whole
Acts, Proceedings, and Conclusions of the saids Commissioners
contained in a Book and Register, subscribed by
Mister <hi rend='italic'>Andrew Ker</hi> their Clerk,
and by Master <hi rend='italic'>George Leslie</hi>
Moderator, and Master <hi rend='italic'>William Jaffray</hi>, Clerk to the said
Committee; Declare much wisedome, diligence, vigilancie,
and commendable zeal; And that the saids Commissioners
have orderly and formally proceeded in every
thing according to their Commissions; Do therefore Ratifie
and Approve the said whole Acts, Proceedings, and
Conclusions of the Commissioners of the two Assemblies
aforesaid.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>3. Februar. 1645. Die Lunæ, Post meridiem.</hi> Sess. 10.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act of the Generall Assembly of the Kirk of
Scotland, for the establishing and putting in
execution of the</hi> Directory <hi rend='italic'>for the publick
Worship of GOD.</hi></head>

<p>
Whereas an happy Unity and Uniformity in Religion amongst
the Kirks of Christ in these three Kingdoms;
united under one Soveraigne, hath been long and earnestly
<pb n="257"/><anchor id="Pg257"/>
wished for by the godly and well-affected amongst us, was
propounded as a main Article of the large Treaty, without
which Band and Bulwark no safe well-grounded and
lasting Peace could be expected; And afterward with
greater strength and maturity, revived in the Solemne League
and Covenant of the three Kingdomes; whereby they
stand straitly obliged to endeavour the neerest Uniformity
in one forme of Church-government, Directory of Worship,
Confession of Faith, and forme of Catechising:
Which hath also before and since our entring into that Covenant,
been the matter of many Supplications and Remonstrances
and sending Commissioners to the Kings Majestie,
of Declarations to the Honourable Houses of the Parliament
of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, and of Letters to the Reverend Assembly
of Divines, and others of the Ministerie of the Kirk
of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, being also the end of our sending Commissioners,
as was desired from this Kirk, with Commission to
treat of Uniformitie in the foure particulars afore-mentioned,
with such Committees as should be appointed by
both Houses of the Parliament of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, and by the Assembly
of Divines sitting at Westminster: And beside
all this, it being in point of conscience the chief motive and
end of our adventuring upon manifold and great hazards,
for quenching the devouring flame of the present unnaturall
and bloody Warre in <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, though to the weakning of
this Kingdome within it self, and the advantage of the Enemy
which hath invaded it, accounting nothing too dear
to us, so that this our joy be fulfilled. And now this
great Work being so far advanced, that a Directory for the
publick Worship of GOD in all the three Kingdomes,
being agreed upon by the Honourable Houses of the Parliament
of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, after consultation with the Divines of
both Kingdomes there assembled, and sent to us for our
Approbation, that being also agreed upon by this Kirk and
Kingdome of <hi rend='italic'>Scotland</hi>, it may be in the name of both
Kingdomes presented to the King, for his Royal consent
and Ratification. The General Assembly having most seriously
considered, revised, and examined the Directory afore
mentioned, after several publick readings of it, after much
<pb n="258"/><anchor id="Pg258"/>
deliberation, both publickly, and in private Committees,
after full liberty given to all to object against it, and earnest,
invitations of all who have any scruples about it to make
known the same; that they might be satisfied, Do unanimously,
and without a contrary Voice, Agree to, and
Approve the following directory, in all the Heads thereof,
together with the Preface set before it: And doth
require, decerne, and ordain, That according to the plain
tenour and meaning thereof, and the intent of the Preface,
it be carefully and uniformly observed and practised by all
the Ministers and others within this Kingdome, whom it
doth concerne; which practice shall be begun, upon Intimation
given to the several Presbyteries, from the Commissioners
of this General Assembly, who shall also take special
care for the timeous Printing of this Directory, that a
printed Copy of it, be provided and kept for the use of
every Kirk in this Kingdome; Also that each Presbyterie
have a printed Copy thereof for their use, and take special
notice of the Observation or neglect thereof in every Congregation
within their bounds, and make known the same
to the Provincial or General Assembly, as there shall be
cause. Provided alwayes, that the Clause in the Directory,
of the Administration of the Lords Supper, which
mentioneth the communicants sitting about the Table, or
at it, be not interpreted, as if in the judgement of this
Kirk, it were indifferent and free for any of the Communicants,
nor to come to, and receive at the Table; or as if
we did approve the distributing of the Elements by the Minister
to each Communicant, and not by the Communicants
among themselves. It is also provided, That this
shall be no prejudice to the order and practice of this Kirk,
in such particulars as are appointed by the Books of Discipline,
and Acts of General Assemblies, and are not otherwise
ordered and appointed in the Directory,
</p>

<p>
Finally, the Assembly doth with much joy and thankfulnes
acknowledge the rich blessing and invaluable mercy of
God, in bringing the so much wished for uniformity in
Religion, to such a happy Period, that these Kingdoms
once at so great distance in the form of Worship, are now
<pb n="259"/><anchor id="Pg259"/>
by the blessing of GOD brought to a neerer Uniformity
than any other Reformed Kirks, which is unto us the return
of our Prayers, and a lightning of our Eyes, and reviving
of our hearts, in the midst of our many sorrows and
sufferings, a taking away in a great measure, the reproach
of the People of GOD, to the stopping of the mouthes of
Malignant and dis-affected persons, and an opening
unto us a door of hope, that GOD hath yet thoughts of
Peace towards us, and not of evil, to give us an expected
end: In the expectation and confidence whereof we do
rejoyce, beseeching the Lord to preserve these Kingdomes
from Heresies, Schismes, Offences, Prophanesse, and
whatsoever is contrary to sound Doctrine, and the power
of Godlinesse, and to continue with us and the generations
following, these his pure and purged Ordinances, together
with an increase of the power and life thereof, To the glory
of his great Name, the enlargement of the Kingdom of
his Son, the corroboration of Peace and Love between the
Kingdoms, the unity and content of all his People, and
our edifying one another in love.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The</hi> Directory <hi rend='italic'>for
Worship, mentioned in the preceeding
Act, needs not to be here printed, because
it is to be printed in a Book by it self.</hi>
</p>

</div>

</div>
<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>7. February, 1645. Post meridiem.</hi> Sess. 14.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Overtures for advancement of Learning
and good Order in Grammar Schools
and Colledges.</hi></head>

<p>
I. That every Grammar School be visited twice in the
year by Visitors, to be appointed by the Presbyterie
<pb n="260"/><anchor id="Pg260"/>
and Kirk-Session in Landward Parishes, and by the
Town-Councel in Burghs, with their Ministers; and
where Universities are, by the Universities, with consent
alwayes of the Patrons of the School, that both the fidelitie
and diligence of the Masters, and the proficiencie of the
Schollars in Pietie and Learning may appear, and deficiencie
censured as well; And that the Visitors see that the
Masters be not attracted by any other imployments, which
may divert them their diligent attendance.
</p>

<p>
II. That for the remedie of the great decay of Poesie,
and of abilitie to make Verse, and in respect of the common
ignorance of Prosodie, no School-master be admitted
to teach a Grammar School, in Burghs, or other considerable
Paroches, but such as after examination, shall
be found skilfull in the Latine Tongue, not only for Prose,
but also for Verse; And that after other trials to be made
by the Ministers, and others depute by the Session, Town,
and Paroch for this effect, that he be also approven by the
Presbyterie.
</p>

<p>
III. That neither the Greek Language, nor Logick,
nor any part of Philosophie be taught in any Grammar
School, or private place within this Kingdom, to young
Schollers, who thereafter are to enter to any Colledge,
unlesse it be for a preparation to their entrie there: And
notwitstanding of any progresse, any may pretend to have
made privately in these studies, yet in the Colledge hee shall
not enter to any higher Classe, then that wherein the Greek
Language is taught, and being entred, shall proceed orderly
through the rest of the Classes, until he finish the
Ordinary course of four years: Unlesse after due triall and
examination, he be found equall in Learning, to the best or
most part of that classe, to which he desires to ascend, by
over-leaping a mid-Classe, or to the best or most part of
those who are to be graduat, if he supplicate to obtain any
degree before the ordinary time. And also, That there be
found other pregnant reasons to move the faculty of Arts to
condescend thereto; And otherwise that he be not admitted
to the Degree of Master of Arts.
</p>

<pb n="261"/><anchor id="Pg261"/>

<p>
IV. That none be admitted to enter a Student of the Greek
tongue in any Colledge, unlesse after triall he be found able
to make a congruous Theame in Latine, or at least, being
admonished of his errour, can readily shew how to correct
the same.
</p>

<p>
V. That none be promoved from an inferiour Class of
the ordinary course to a superiour, unlesse he be found
worthy, and to have sufficiently profited: otherwise, that
he be ordained not to ascend with his con-disciples, and if
he be a Burser, that he lose his Burse. And namely, it is
to be required, That those who are taught in <hi rend='italic'>Aristotle</hi>, be
found well instructed in his Text, and be able to report in
Greek, and understand his whole definitions, divisions,
and principall precepts, so far as they have proceeded.
</p>

<p>
VI. Because it is a disgrace to Learning, and hinderance
to Trades and other Callings, and an abuse hurtfull to
the Publick, that such as are ignorant and unworthy, be
honoured with a Degree or publick Testimony of Learning;
That therefore such triall be taken of Students, specially
of Magistrands, that those who are found unworthy,
be not admitted to the Degree and honour of Masters.
</p>

<p>
VII. That none who have entred to one Colledge for
triall or studie, be admitted to another Colledge, without
the Testimonial of the Masters of that Colledge wherein he
entred first, both concerning his Literature, and dutifull
behaviour, so long as he remained there: at least, untill
the Masters of that Colledge from whence he cometh, be
timely advertised, that they may declare if they have any
thing lawfully to be objected in the contrary. And that
none be admitted, promoved, or receive Degree in any
Colledge, who was rejected in another Colledge for his unfitnesse
and unworthinesse, or any other cause repugnant
to good Order, who leaves the Colledge where he was for
eschewing of Censure, or chastising for any fault committed
by him; or who leaves the Colledge because he was chastised,
or for any other grudge or injust Quarrell against his
Masters.
</p>

<p>
VIII. That none of those who may be lawfully received
in one Colledge, after he was in another, be admitted
<pb n="262"/><anchor id="Pg262"/>
to any other Classe, but to that wherein he was or should
have been in the Colledge from whence he came, except
upon reasons mentioned in the third Article preceding.
</p>

<p>
IX. That at the time of every Generall Assembly, the
Commissioners directed thereto, from all the Universities
of this Kingdom, Meet and consult together, for the establishment
and advancement of Pietie, Learning, and good
Order in the Schools and Universities, and be carefull
that a correspondence be kept among the Universities, and
so farre as is possible, an Uniformitie in Doctrine and good
Order.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>The Generall Assembly, after serious consideration of the
Overtures and Articles above written, Approves the
same, and ordains them to be observed, and to have the
strength of an Act and Ordinance of Assembly in all time-coming.</hi>
</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>The Humble Petition the Generall Assembly
of the Kirk of</hi> Scotland.</head>

<p>
To the Honourable and High Court
of Parliament.
</p>

<p>
According to the constant and commendable practice of
the Generall Assemblies of this Kirk, Wee judge it incumbent
to us, Right Honourable, when the displeasure
of the Almighty, and the extream danger of this Kirk and
Kingdome is so undenyably demonstrate to the eyes of the
whole World, by the Invasion, Increase, and Successe
of these Barbarous Irishes, and treacherous Countrey-men
joyned with them (Not onely out of conscience of the trust
committed unto us), To proceed with the censures of the
Kirk, against these who have joyned, or shall happen to
joyne themselves with these Enemies of GOD and his
Cause, To appoint a Solemne Fast and Humiliation through
the Kingdom, and to give Warning to all the Ministers and
Members of this Kirk of the dangers and duties of the time;
<pb n="263"/><anchor id="Pg263"/>
But also, out of respect to your Honours, <hi rend='italic'>who judge not for
man, but for the Lord: Who is with you in the Judgement: and
standeth in the Congregation of the mighty</hi>: Humbly to present
your Honours with our thoughts and desires concerning the
duties which the exigency of this time expecteth from your
hands.
</p>

<p>
The impunity of known Incendiaries and Malignants, as
by the course of Divine providence (permitting those who
have formerly escaped the hand of Justice to be the prime
instruments of our present Troubles) it is held forth for a
cause of the Wrath which yet burneth more and more; So
hath it been acknowledged before GOD in our publick
Humiliations, to be a maine cause of GODS Controversie
with the Land, and an accession to the guiltinesse of
the cruelty, villainy, and other mischiefs committed by
them and their followers: And to lye still under the guilt
after solemne Confession, were an high provocation of
GOD, and an heavy aggravation of our sinne; And on
the one part, doth grieve the Godly, discourage their
hearts, and weaken their hands, On the other part, doth
harden them who are already engaged, to persist in their
unnaturall and bloudy practices, heartneth others, who
have not hitherto avowed their Malignancy, openly to declare
themselves, and is laid hold upon by the disaffected,
who lye in wait to finde occasions, as fitting to work the People
to an unwillingnesse of undergoing necessary Burthens
imposed for publick good.
</p>

<p>
Although the Lord hath shewn unto us great and sore
Troubles, and our heart may be broken with reproach,
shame, and dishonour, put upon us by the vilest among
men; Yet hath he made known unto us the power of his
working amidst these manifold troubles, bringing forward
the much desired Work of Uniformity in Worship and Government
to a greater perfection then was expected (as
your Honours and wee did see the other day with joy of
heart) which is a Testimony from Heaven, That the Lord
hath not left us in the fiery Furnace, but dwelleth still in the
midst of the burning Bush, and should rouze up our drouping
spirits to follow GOD fully, and quicken our slownesse
<pb n="264"/><anchor id="Pg264"/>
to hasten and <hi rend='italic'>help the Lord against the mighty</hi>. In delay
there is perill of strengthening the arme of the intestine
Enemie, making faint the hearts of our Neighbours and
Friends, and disabling us for reaching help unto those who
are wrestling against much opposition to perfect the Work of
Reformation. The reproach under which we lye almost
buried, should bee so farre from retarding proceedings,
that it should insend the Spirit into a higher degree of desire,
and expede the hand to speedier action for vindicating our
own name, and <hi rend='italic'>that Name which is above all names</hi> from the
daily <hi rend='italic'>reproach of the foolish</hi>.
</p>

<p>
May it therefore please your Honours, in the zeal of the
Lord, To proceed with some speedy course of Justice against
such persons as are known to have joyned themselves,
either actually in Arms, or by their counsell, supplies,
encouragements, have strenghtened the hands of the bloody
Enemies, whereby a cause of the Controversie shall be
removed, the Land cleansed of the blood that is shed therein,
the cruell and crooked generation disheartned, the
fainting hearts of the Godly refreshed, and their feeble knees
strengthened; And cheerfully and unanimously to resolve
upon, and put in execution all lawfull and possible wayes of
speedy and active pursuing and extirpating these barbarous
and unnaturall Enemies within the Kingdom: Whereby
your thankfulnesse to GOD for promoving his owne
Work, and your endeavours of uniformity, shall be testified;
your sense of the dishonour of this Nation, and of the danger
of delay expressed; and your conscience of the Oath of God
upon you manifested. Wee are confident of your Honours
conscience, and care, onely we exhort you in the Lord, to
unite your Spirits and accelerate your counsels and endeavours:
And pray the Lord of Hosts to prosper your enterprises,
according to the engagement of his Name, interest
of his Work, and necessity of his People, to his own glory,
the establishment of the Kings Throne in righteousnesse,
the comfort of his Saints, and the conversion or confusion
of Enemies. <hi rend='italic'>Be of good courage, and behave your selves valiantly,
for our people, and for the cities of our God. Arise, and the
Lord be with you.</hi>
</p>

</div>

<pb n="265"/><anchor id="Pg265"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Overtures propounded by the Committee, appointed
by this venerable Assembly, for ordering
of the Bursars of Theologie, and maintaining
of them at Schools of Divinitie.</hi></head>

<p>
I. That every Bursar have yearly payed him for his maintenance
100. l. at the least.
</p>

<p>
II. That the said maintenance be taken forth of the
Kirk penalties, according to the intention of the first Act
for maintaining of Bursars.
</p>

<p>
III. That every Presbyterie consisting of twelve Kirks
in number, maintain a Bursar yearly at the University.
</p>

<p>
IV. And where the Presbyteries are fewer in number,
that they joyne with other Presbyteries to make up their
number: And the superplus of the number to be ordered
and disposed by the Presbyteries and Synods: And that
their Books bear Records thereof.
</p>

<p>
V. That the Kirks of these Presbyteries be proportionally
stented according to the number of the communicants
in each Parochin.
</p>

<p>
VI. That the said maintenance be collected by the Moderatour
of every Presbyterie, by equall divided portions,
and the one half to be brought in to the Winter Synod, and
given to the said Bursars, and the other half at the Summer
Synod, to be sent unto them: And that the severall Synods
take an exact compt hereof, and see that all be rightly done,
and that their Books bear the report hereof to the Generall
Assembly.
</p>

<p>
VII. That the time of Bursars abode at the Schools of
Divinity exceed not foure years: which being expired, or
in case before the expiring of the said time, any be removed
either by death, or by some Calling to a particular
Charge, another be presented to the said Benefit.
</p>

<p>
VIII. That in case any prove deficient in payment of
the said maintenance for the time to come, That it shall be
carefully exacted by the Synods, and sent over to the General
Assembly, to be disposed upon by them, as they shall finde
<pb n="266"/><anchor id="Pg266"/>
expedient; that no Person may have benefit in their slacknesse
and neglect.
</p>

<p>
IX. That all Bursars of Theologie bring sufficient Testimonies
yearly from the Universities where they are bred,
of their proficiencie and good behaviour: And that they be
also ready to give a proof of their labours at the severall
Synods, if it shall be required. And if they be found deficient,
that they be denuded of the said benefit, and others
more hopefull placed in their rooms.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The General Assembly approves these Overtures above-written,
And Ordains the same to be observed in all time coming. And
that Presbyteries (who have not already done it) begin and enter
to the maintaining of their Bursars, in manner foresaid, in
this present year 1645. And recommends to Presbyteries, to
make choice of such for the Burse, as are of good report, inclined
to Learning, and have past their course of Philosophie, And
to try their qualifications before they send them to Universities.</hi>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>The opinion of the Committee for keeping the
greater Uniformitie in this Kirk, in the practice
and observation of the Directory in some
points of publick Worship.</hi></head>

<p>
I. It is the Humble Opinion of the Committee for regulating
that Excercise of reading and expounding the
Scriptures read upon the Lords Day, mentioned in the Directory,
That the Minister and People repair to the Kirk,
half an hour before that time at which ordinarily the Minister
now entreth to the publick Worship; And that, that
Exercise of reading and expounding, together with the ordinary
Exercise of Preaching, be perfected and ended at the
time which formerly closed the Exercise of publick Worship.
</p>

<p>
II. In the Administration of Baptisme, it will be convenient,
That, that Sacrament be administred in face of the
Congregation, that what is spoken and done, may be heard
<pb n="267"/><anchor id="Pg267"/>
and seen of all, and that it be administred after the Sermon,
before the Blessing.
</p>

<p>
III. In the Administration of the Lords Supper, it is the
judgement of the Committee.
</p>

<p>
1. That Congregations be still tried and examined before
the Communion, according to the bygone practice of this
Kirk.
</p>

<p>
2. That there be no reading in the time of communicating;
but the Minister making a short Exhortation at
every Table, that thereafter there be silence during the time
of the Communicants receiving, except onely when the
Minister expresseth some few more sentences, sutable to the
present condition of the Communicants in the receiving,
that they may be incited and quikned in their Meditations
in the Action.
</p>

<p>
3. That distribution of the Elements among the Communicants
be universally used: And for that effect, that the
Bread be so prepared, that the Communicants may divide
it amongst themselves, after the Minister hath broken, and
delivered it to the nearest.
</p>

<p>
4. That while the Tables are dissolving, and filling,
there be alwayes singing of some portion of a Psalme, according
to the custome.
</p>

<p>
5. That the Communicants both before their going to,
and after their coming from the Table, shall only joyne
themselves to the present publick Excercise then in hand.
</p>

<p>
6. That when the Communion is to be celebrate in a Paroch,
one Minister may be imployed for assisting the Minister
of the Paroch, or at the most two.
</p>

<p>
7. That there be one Sermon of Preparation delivered in
the ordinary Place of publick Worship, upon the day immediatly
preceeding.
</p>

<p>
8. That before the serving of the Tables, there be
onely one Sermon delivered to those who are to communicate,
and that in the Kirk where the Service is to be performed.
And that in the same Kirk there be one Sermon of
Thanksgiving, after the Communion is ended.
</p>

<p>
9. When the Parochiners are so numerous, that their
Paroch Kirk cannot contain them, so that there is a necessity
to keep out such of the Paroch as cannot conveniently
<pb n="268"/><anchor id="Pg268"/>
have place, That in that case the Brother who assists the
Minister of the Paroch, may be ready, if need be, to give a
word of Exhortation in some convenient place appointed for
that purpose, to those of that Paroch, who that day are not to
Communicate; which must not be begun until the Sermon
delivered in the Kirk be concluded.
</p>

<p>
10. That of those who are present in the Kirk where the
Communion is celebrate, none be permitted to go forth
while the whole Tables be served, and the blessing pronounced,
unlesse it be for more commodious order, and in other
cases of necessity.
</p>

<p>
11. That the Minister who cometh to assist, have a special
care to provide his own Paroch, lest otherwise while he is
about to Minister comfort to others, his own Flock be left
destitute of preaching.
</p>

<p>
12. That none coming from another Paroch, shall be
admitted to the Communion, without a Testimonial from
their own Minister: And no Minister shall refuse a Testimonial
to any of his Paroch, who communicates ordinarily
at their own Paroch Kirk, and are without scandal in their
life for the time. And this is no wayes to prejudge any honest
Person, who occasionally is in the place where the
Communion is celebrate; or such as by death, or absence
of their own Minister, could not have a Testimonial.
</p>

<p>
IV. It is also the judgement of the Committee, That
the Ministers bowing in the Pulpit; though a lawful custome
in this Kirk, be hereafter laid aside, for satisfaction of
the desires of the reverend Divines in the Synod of England,
and uniformity with that Kirk so much endeared to us.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Assembly having considered seriously the judgement of the
Committee above-written, Doeth approve the same in all
the Articles thereof, and Ordains them to be observed in
all time hereafter.</hi>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n="269"/><anchor id="Pg269"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>10. February, 1645. Postmeridiem</hi> Sess. 16.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act of the Generall Assembly of the Kirk of</hi>
Scotland, <hi rend='italic'>Approving the Propositions concerning
Kirk government and Ordination
of Ministers.</hi></head>

<p>
The General Assembly, being most desirous and solicitous,
not onely of the establishment and preservation
of the Form of Kirk-government in this Kingdome, according
to the Word of GOD, Books of Discipline, Acts
of Generall Assemblies, and Nationall Covenant; But
also of an Uniformity in Kirk-government betwixt these
Kingdomes now more straitly and strongly united by the
late Solemne League and Covenant: And considering,
That as in former times there did, so hereafter there may
arise through the neernesse of Contagion, manifold mischiefs
to this Kirk from a corrupt Form of Government in
the Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>: Like as the precious opportunity of
bringing the Kirks of Christ in all the three Kingdoms, to
an Uniformity in Kirk-government, being the happinesse
of the present times above the former; which may also by the
blessing of God, prove an effectuall meane, and a good foundation
to prepare for a safe and well-grounded Pacification,
by removing the cause from which the present Pressures and
bloodie Wars did originally proceed: And now the Assembly
having thrice read, and diligently examined the
Propositions (hereunto annexed) concerning the officers,
Assemblies, and Government of the Kirk; and
concerning the Ordination of Ministers, brought unto us
as the results of the long and learned Debates of the Assembly
of Divines sitting at <hi rend='italic'>Westminster</hi>, and of the Treaty
of Uniformity with the Commissioners of this Kirk there
residing; After mature deliberation, and after tymous
calling upon and warning of all who have any exceptions
against the same, to make them known, that they might
<pb n="270"/><anchor id="Pg270"/>
receive satisfaction, Doth Agree to, and Approve the
Propositions aforementioned touching Kirk-government
and Ordination, and doth hereby Authorize the Commissioners
of this Assembly who are to meet at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, to
agree to, and conclude in the name of this Assembly, an
Uniformitie betwixt the Kirks in both Kingdoms in the
aforementioned particulars, so soon as the same shall be ratified,
without any substantiall alteration, by an Ordinance
of the Honourable Houses of the Parliament of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>:
Which Ratification shall be timely intimate and made
known by the Commissioners of this Kirk residing at <hi rend='italic'>London</hi>.
Provided alwayes, That this Act shall be no wayes prejudiciall
to the further discussion and examination of that Article,
which holds forth, that the Doctor or Teacher,
hath power of the administration of the Sacraments as well
as the Pastor; As also of the distinct Rights and Interests of
Presbyteries and People in the calling of Ministers: But
that it shall be free to debate and discusse these points as
GOD shall be pleased to give further light.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Propositions of Government, and Ordination
mentioned in the preceding Act, are not
to be here Printed: but after the Ratification
thereof by the Parliament of</hi> England,
<hi rend='italic'>they are to be Printed by warrant of the Commissioners
of this Assembly.</hi>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>12. Feb. 1645. Post meridiem</hi> Sess. 18.</head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly, after mature deliberation,
having found it most necessary that this whole Nation
be timely Warned, and duly Informed of their present
Dangers, and the Remedies to be used, and Duties
to be done for preventing and removing thereof, Doth ordain
this Warning to be forth with Printed and Published,
<pb n="271"/><anchor id="Pg271"/>
and sent to all the Presbyteries in this Kingdom, as also to
the Presbyteries that are with our Armies. And that each
Presbyterie immediately after the receipt hereof, take speedy
course for the Reading of it in every Congregation within
their bounds, upon the Lords day after the forenoons
Sermon, and before the blessing: and that they give account
of their diligence herein to the Commissioners of the
Generall Assembly; Who have hereby Power and Warrand
to try and censure such as shall contemne or slight the said
Warning, or shall refuse or neglect to obey this Ordinance.
</p>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>A Solemne and Seasonable Warning To the
Noblemen, Barons, Gentlemen, Burrows, Ministers,
and Commons of</hi> Scotland; <hi rend='italic'>As
also to our ARMIES without and
within this Kingdom.</hi></head>

<p>
The Cause of GOD in this Kingdom, both in the beginnings
and Progresse of it, hath been carried,
through much craft and mighty opposition of Enemies,
and through other perplexities and dangers; GOD
so disposing, for the greater glory of his manifold and marvellous
Wisedome and his invincible Power, and for our
greater tryall.
</p>

<p>
These dangers both from without and from within, together
with the remedies thereof, have been from time to
time represented and held forth, in the many publick Supplications
of this Kirk and Kingdom to the King, and in
their many Declarations, Remonstrances, Letters, Acts,
and other publick Intimations: Particularly by a necessary
Warning published by the Commissioners of the Generall
Assembly in January 1643; And by the Remonstrance of
the same Comissioners to the Convention of Estates in July
thereafter concerning the Dangers of Religion, and Remedies
of these Dangers: which Warning and Remonstrance
<pb n="272"/><anchor id="Pg272"/>
at that time had, by the blessing of GOD, very good and
comfortable effects. And now the General Assembly itself,
being by a speciall Providence, and upon extraordinary
occasions called together, while GOD is writing
bitter things against this Land in great Letters, which he
that runs may read: and knowing that we cannot be answerable
to GOD, nor our own consciences, nor the expectation
of others, if from this chief Watch Tower we should
give no Seasonable Warning to the City of GOD: While
we think of these things, <hi rend='italic'>For Sions sake we will not hold our peace,
and for Jerusalems sake we will not rest:</hi> trusting that
GOD will give, though nor to all, yet to many, a seeing
Eye, a hearing Ear, and an understanding Heart: <hi rend='italic'>For who
is wise and he shall understand these things, prudent and he shall
know them; For the Waves of the Lord are right, and the just shall
walk in them, but the transgressors shall fall therein, and the wicked
shall do wickedly and none of the wicked shall understand.</hi>
</p>

<p>
That which we principally intend, is to hold forth (so
farre as the Lord gives us light) how this Nation ought to
be affected with the present Mercies and Judgements;
What use is to be made of the Lords dealings: And, what
is required of a people so dealt with.
</p>

<p>
Had we been timely awaked, and taken warning, either
from the exemplary judgement of other Nations; or from
Gods threatnings by the mouths of his servants amongst our
selves; or from our owne former visitations, and namely,
The Sword, threatned and drawn against us, both at home
and from abroad, but at that time through the forbearance
of GOD, put up in the Sheath again, wee might have
prevented the miseries under which now we groane. But
the Cup of trembling, before taken out of our hands, is
again come about to us, that wee may drink deeper of it:
And although when these bloody Monsters, the Irish Rebels,
together with some degenerate, unnaturall, and
perfidious Countreymen of our own, did first lift up their
heads, and enter this Kingdome in a hostile way, it was
looked upon as a light matter, and the great judgement
which hath since appeared in it, not apprehended: yet now
wee are made more sensible, that they are <hi rend='italic'>The rod of Gods
<pb n="273"/><anchor id="Pg273"/>
wrath, and the staffe in their hand</hi>, which hath stricken us
these three times, is <hi rend='italic'>his indignation. He hath shewed his people
hard things, and made us to drink the wine of astonishment</hi>. Take
we therefore notice of the hand that smiteth us, <hi rend='italic'>for affliction
cometh not forth of the dust, neither doth trouble spring out of the
ground. There is no evill in the City</hi> nor Countrey <hi rend='italic'>which the Lord
hath not done.</hi> He it is <hi rend='italic'>that formeth the light, and createth
darknesse; Who maketh peace, and createth evill</hi>: He it is that hath
given a charge to the Sword, <hi rend='italic'>so that it cannot be still</hi>: He it
is that hath his other <hi rend='italic'>Arrows ready upon the string to shoot at us</hi>,
the Pestilence and Famine.
</p>

<p>
In the next place let us apply our hearts to know, and to
search, and to seek out wisdome, and the reason of things,
and to understand the language of this present judgment,
and Gods meaning in it, For though <hi rend='italic'>the Almighty giveth not
an accompt of any of his matters, and hath his way in the sea, and
his path in the deep waters which cannot be traced</hi>; Yet he is pleased
by the light of his Word and Spirit, by the voice of our
own consciences, and by that which is written and ingraven
upon our judgement, as with the point of a Diamond
and a Pen of iron, to make known in some measure his
meaning unto his servants. <hi rend='italic'>God hath spoken once, yea twice,
yet man perceiveth not</hi>; Therefore now hath he made this rod
to speak aloud the third time, that we may <hi rend='italic'>hear the voice of
the rod, and who hath appointed it</hi>. That which the rod pointeth
at, is not any guilt of Rebellion or disloyaltie in us, as
the Sons of <hi rend='italic'>Belial</hi> do slander and belye the Solemne League
and Covenant of the three Kingdoms, which we are so
farre from repenting of, that we cannot remember or mention
it without great joy and thankfulnesse to God, as that
which hath drawn many blessings after it, and unto which
God hath given manifold and evident testimonies, for no
sooner was the Covenant begun to bee taken in England;
but sensibly the condition of affairs there was changed to the
better; and though a little before the Enemy was coming
in like a Flood, yet as soon as the Spirit of the Lord did
lift up the Standard against him, from that day forward the
Waters of their Deluge did decrease.
</p>

<p>
And for our part, our Forces sent into that Kingdom,
<pb n="274"/><anchor id="Pg274"/>
in pursuance of that Covenant, have been so mercifully and
manifestly assisted, and blessed from Heaven (though in
the mids of many dangers and distresses, and much want and
hardship) and have been so farre instrumentall to the foyling
and scattering of two principal Armies; First, the
Marquesse of Newcastle his Army, And afterward, Prince
<hi rend='italic'>Ruperts</hi> and his together; And to the reducing of two strong
Cities, York and Newcastle, that we have what to answer
the Enemy that reproacheth us concerning that businesse,
and that which may make iniquitie it self to stop her mouth.
But which is more unto us than all Victories, or whatsomever
temporal Blessing, the Reformation of Religion in
England, and Uniformity therein between both Kingdoms
(a principal end of that Covenant) is so far advanced,
that the English Service-Book, with the Holy-dayes,
and many other Ceremonies contained in it, together with
the Prelacy, the fountain of all these, are abolished and
taken away by Ordinance of Parliament; and a Directory
for the Worship of God in all the three Kingdoms, agreed
upon in the Assemblies and in the Parliaments of both Kingdoms,
without a contrary voice in either; the Government
of the Kirk by Congregational Elderships, Classical Presbyteries,
Provincial and National Assemblies, is agreed
upon by the Assembly of Divines at Westminster, which
is also voted and concluded in both Houses of the Parliament
of England: And what is yet remaining of the intended
Uniformitie is in a good way; So that let our Lot fal in
other things, as it may, <hi rend='italic'>the Will of the Lord be done</hi>; In this we
rejoyce, and will rejoyce, that our Lord Jesus Christ is
no loser, but a Conquerour, that his Ordinances take
place, that his Cause prevaileth, and the work of purging
and building his Temple goeth forward, and not backward.
Neither yet are we so to understand <hi rend='italic'>the voice of the rod</hi> which
lyeth heavy upon us, as if the Lords meining were to pluck
up what he hath planted, and to pull down what he hath
builded in this Kingdom, to have no more pleasure in us,
to <hi rend='italic'>remove our Candlestick, and to take his Kingdom from us</hi>: nay,
before that our God cast us off, and the <hi rend='italic'>glory depart from Israel</hi>,
let him rather consume us by the Sword, and the Famine,
<pb n="275"/><anchor id="Pg275"/>
and the Pestilence, so that he will but keep his own great
Name from reproach and blasphemy, and own us as his
people in Covenant with him. But <hi rend='italic'>now there is hope in Israel
concerning this thing</hi>, we will beleeve <hi rend='italic'>that we shall yet see the
goodnesse of the Lord in the Land of the living:</hi> We will not cast
away our confidence of a blessed peace, and of the removing
of the scourge and casting it in the Fire, when the Lord,
hath by it performed <hi rend='italic'>his whole Work upon mount Sion and Jerusalem</hi>,
much more will wee be confident of the continuance
of the blessings of the Gospel, <hi rend='italic'>that glory may dwell in our Land.
This is the day of Jacobs trouble, but he shall be saved out of it:</hi> And
the time is comming, when a new Song shall be put in our
mouths, and we shall say, <hi rend='italic'>This is our God, we have waited
for him, and he hath saved us.</hi> Though the Lord smite us, it
is the hand of a Father, not of an Enemy, he is not consuming
us, but refining us, that we may come forth as Gold
out of the Fire. <hi rend='italic'>We are troubled on every side; yet not distressed;
we are perplexed, but not in despaire; persecuted, but not
forsaken; cast downe, but not destroyed.</hi> We know assuredly
there is more mercy in emptying us from Vessell to
Vessell, then in suffering us to settle on our Lees, whereby
our taste should remain in us, and our scent not be
changed.
</p>

<p>
These things premised, we come to the true language of
this heavy judgement, and to the reall procuring causes thereof.
<hi rend='italic'>For the transgression of Jacob is all this, and for the sins of
the house of Israel.</hi> God is hereby shewing to great and smal
in this Land their work and their transgression, that they
have exceeded. <hi rend='italic'>He openeth also their eare to discipline, and commandeth
that they return from iniquity.</hi> We leave every Congregation
in the Land, every Family in every Congregation,
&amp; every Person in every Family to examine their own hearts
and wayes, &amp; to mourn for Congregationall, Domesticall,
and Personall sinnes: Cursed shall they be who have added
fuell to the fire, and now bring no water to extinguish it,
who had a great hand in the provocation, and bear no part
in the humiliation.
</p>

<p>
Let every one commune with his own conscience, and
<pb n="276"/><anchor id="Pg276"/>
repent of his own wickednesse, and say, <hi rend='italic'>What have I
done</hi>? Wee shall here touch onely the Nationall sinnes, or
at least more publick ones, then those of a Family or Congregation,
which we also intend for chief causes of a publick
Fast and Humiliation. If among our Nobles, Gentrie
and Barons, there have been some studying their own private
interests more then the publick, and <hi rend='italic'>Seeking their own things
more then the things of Christ, or oppressing and defrauding the poore
sort and the needie, because it was in the power of their hand</hi>: and
if among our Ministrie there have been divers Time-servers,
<hi rend='italic'>Who have not renounced the hidden things of dishonesty, whose hearts
have not been right before God, nor stedfast in his Covenant,</hi> who
have been secretly haters of the <hi rend='italic'>Power of Godlinesse</hi>, and of
Mortification; shall not GOD search all this out? <hi rend='italic'>who will bring to
light the hidden things of darknesse, and will make manifest the counsels of the
hearts.</hi> In these also leaving all men to a judging and searching of
themselves, there are many other provocations which are apparent in all or many
of this Nation, from which, <hi rend='italic'>though they wash with nitre, and take much
sope</hi>, yet they cannot make themselves clean: Because of these <hi rend='italic'>the
Land mourneth</hi>, and at these the Sword striketh.
</p>

<p>
As first, the contempt, neglect, and dis-esteem of the glorious Gospel; our
unbelief, unfruitfulnesse, luke-warmnesse, formality, and hardnesse of heart,
under all the means of Grace; our not receiving of Christ in our hearts, nor
seeking to know him, and glorifie him in all his Offices. The power of
Godlinesse is hated and mocked by many to this day, and by the better sort too
much neglected, and many Christian duties are not minded: as, <hi rend='italic'>The not
speaking of our own words, nor finding of our own pleasure upon the Lords
day</hi>: Holy and edifying conference both on that day, and at other occasions:
The instructing, admonishing, comforting, and rebuking one another, as Divine
Providence ministreth occasion. In many Families almost no knowledge nor
worship of GOD to be found: yea, there are among the Ministers who have
strenghtened the hearts and hands of the profane more then of the godly,
<pb n="277"/><anchor id="Pg277"/>
and have not taken <hi rend='italic'>heed to the ministrie which they have received
of the Lord to fulfill it.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Next, GOD hath sent the Sword to avenge the quarrel
of his broken Covenant: For besides the defection of many
of this Nation under the Prelats from our first Nationall Covenant,
a sinne not forgotten by GOD, if not repented
by men as well as forsaken, our latter Vows and Covenants
have been also foully violated, by not contributing our
uttermost assistance to this Cause, with our Estates and Lives;
by not endeavouring with all faithfulnesse, the discovery,
triall, and condigne punishment of Malignants,
and evil Instruments; yea, by complying too much with
those, who have not onely born Armes, and given their
personall presence and assistance, but also drawn and led on
others after them in the shedding of our Brethrens blood:
Therefore is our sinne made our punishment, and <hi rend='italic'>We are
filled with the fruit of our own wayes. These horns now push the sides
of Judah and Jerusalem, because the Carpenters when they ought
and might, did not cut them off</hi>: And yet so this day the
course of Justice is obstructed: The Lord himself will execute
justice if men will not. But above all, let it bee deeply
and seriously thought of, that our Covenant is broken by
the neglect of a reall Reformation of our selves and others
under our power: let every one ask his own heart what
lust is mortified in him, or what change wrought in his life
since, more then before the Covenant? Swearing, Cursing,
Profanation of the Lords day, Fornication, and
other uncleannesse, Drunkennesse, Injustice, Lying,
Oppression, Murmuring, Repining, and other sorts of
Prophanenesse still abound too much both in the Countrey
&amp; in our Armies: yea, there is no Reformation of some
Members of publick Judicatories, which is a great dishonour
to God, and foul scandall to the whole Nation.
</p>

<p>
Thirdly, we have not glorified God according to the
great things which he hath done for us, nor made the right
use of former mercies: Since he loved us (<hi rend='italic'>a Nation not
worthy to be beloved</hi>) he hath made us precious and honourable,
but we have not walked worthy of this love: <hi rend='italic'>We
waxed fat and kicked, forsaking God who made us, and lightly
<pb n="278"/><anchor id="Pg278"/>
esteeming the Rock of our salvation.</hi> And this great unthankfulnesse
filleth up our Cup.
</p>

<p>
Forthly, Notwithstanding of so much guiltinesse, we
did send forth our Armies, and undertake great services
presumptuously, without repentance, and making our
peace with God, like the Children of Israel, who trusting
to the goodnesse of their cause, minded no more, but <hi rend='italic'>Which
of us shall goe up first.</hi>
</p>

<p>
It is now high time, under the feeling of so great a burden
both of sinne and wrath to humble our uncircumcised
heart, <hi rend='italic'>to put our mouth in the dust, if so be there may be hope, to
wallow our selves in ashes, to clothe our selves with our shame as
with a garment</hi>, to justifie Gods righteous judgements, to acknowledge
our iniquitie, to make our supplication to our Judge, and to
<hi rend='italic'>seek his face</hi>, that he may <hi rend='italic'>pardon our sinne, and
heal our Land</hi>. The Lord roareth, and shall not his children
tremble? The God of glory thundereth, and <hi rend='italic'>the Highest
uttereth his voice, hailstones and coales of fire</hi>, who will not fall
down and fear before him? The fire waxeth hot, and burneth
round about us, and shall any sit still and be secure? The
storm bloweth hard, &amp; shall any sluggard be still asleep? This
is a day of trouble, and of rebuke, and of blasphemy; who
will not take up a lamentation? Let the Watchmen rouze up
themselves and others, and strive to get their own, and their
peoples hearts deeply affected, and even melted before
the Lord: Let every one turn from his evill way, and
cry mightily to God, and give him no rest till he repent of
the evill, and smell a savour of rest, and say, <hi rend='italic'>It is enough.</hi>
He hath not said to the seed of Jacob, Seek ye me in vain.
<hi rend='italic'>Wee do not mourne as they that have no hope, but we will bear the
indignation of the Lord, because wee have sinned against him, untill
he plead our cause, and execute judgement for us.</hi> And what
though our Candles be put out? So that our Sun shine:
What though our honour be laid in the dust? So that
GOD work out his own honour, yea, our happinesse
out of our shame. In vain have we trusted to the arm of
flesh: In the Lord our GOD is the <hi rend='italic'>Salvation of Israel.</hi>
No flesh must glory before him, <hi rend='italic'>but he that glorieth, must glory
in the Lord.</hi>
</p>

<pb n="279"/><anchor id="Pg279"/>

<p>
These duties of Humiliation, Repentance, Faith, Amendment
of life, and Fervent Prayer, though the principal,
yet are not all which are required at the hands of this
Nation, but men of all sorts and degrees, must timely apply
themselves to such other Resolutions and Actions as are
most suteable and necessary at this time: Which that all
may the better understand, and bee excited and encouraged
to act accordingly, let it be well observed, that the
present state of the Controversie and Cause is no other but
what hath been formerly professed before GOD and the
world, that is, The Reformation and Preservation of Religion,
The Defence of the Honour and Happinesse of the
King, and of the authority of the Parliament, together
with the maintenance of our Lawes, Liberties, Lives,
and Estates. We are not changed from our former principles
and intentions, but these who did fall off from us to
the contrary party, have now made it manifest, that these
were not their ends when they seemed to joyn with us:
<hi rend='italic'>Therefore are they gone out from us, because they were not of us.</hi>
And as our Cause is the fame, so the danger thereof is not
lesse, but greater then before, and that from two sorts of Enemies.
First, from open Enemies, we mean those of the
Popish, Prelatical, and Malignant Faction, who have displayed
a Banner against the Lord, and against his Christ, in
all the three Kingdoms, being <hi rend='italic'>set on fire of Hell</hi>, and by the
special inspiration of Satan, who is full of fury; because he
knowes he hath but a short time to reigne. The Cockatrice
before hatched, is now broken forth into a Viper. The
danger was before feared, now it is felt; before imminent,
now incumbent; before our division, now our destruction
is endeavoured; before the Sword was fourbished
and made ready; now the <hi rend='italic'>Sword is made fat with Flesh, and
drunk with Bloud</hi>, and yet it hungreth and thirsteth for more.
The Queen is most active abroad, using all means for
strengthening the Popish, and suppressing the Protestant
party; insomuch that Malignants have insolently expressed
their confidence, that her journey to France shall prove a
successeful Counsel, and that this Island, and particularly
this Kingdome, shall have a greater power to grapple with
<pb n="280"/><anchor id="Pg280"/>
before the next Summer, then any which yet we have encountred
with. The Irish Rebels have offered to the King to fend
over a greater number into both the Kingdomes: The hostile
intentions of the King of Denmark, if God be not pleased still
to divert and disable him, do plainly enough appear from
his own Letters, sent not long since to the Estates of this
Kingdome. In the mean time, the hellish crue under the
conduct of the excommunicate and forefaulted <hi rend='italic'>Earle of Montrose</hi>,
and of <hi rend='italic'>Alaster Mac-Donald</hi>, a Papist and an Outlaw,
doth exercise such barbarous, unnaturall, horrid, and unheard
of cruelty, as is above expression: And (if not repressed)
what better usage can others not yet touched expect
from them, being now hardened and animated by the successe
which God hath for our humiliation and correction,
permitted unto them: and if they shall now get leave to
secure the High-Lands for themselves, they will not onely
from thence infest the rest of this Countrey, but endeavour
a diversion of our Forces in England, from the prosecution
of the ends expressed in the Covenant of the three Kingdoms,
toward which ends, as their service hath already advantageous,
so their continuance is most necessary.
</p>

<p>
The second sort of Enemies, from which our present
dangers arise, are secret Malignants and Dis-covenanters,
who may be known by these and the like Characters: Their
slighting or censuring of the publick Resolutions of this
Kirk and State: Their consulting and labouring to raise
Jealousies and Divisions, to retard or hinder the execution
of what is ordered by the publick Judicatories: Their
slandering of the Covenant of the three Kingdomes and expedition
into England, as not necessary for the good of
Religion, or safety of this Kingdome, or as tending to
the diminution of the Kings just power and greatnesse:
Their confounding of the Kings Honour and Authority,
with the abuse and pretense thereof, and with Commissions,
Warrants, and Letters, procured from the King,
by the Enemies of this Cause and Covenant, as if we could
not oppose the latter, without encroaching upon the former:
Their whetting of their tongues, to censure and
slander those whom GOD hath honoured as his chief Instruments
<pb n="281"/><anchor id="Pg281"/>
in this Work: Their commending, justifying, or
excusing the proceedings of <hi rend='italic'>James Grahame</hi>,
sometime <hi rend='italic'>Earle
of Montrose</hi>, and his Complices: Their conversing or intercommuning
by word of writ, with him, or other excommunicate
Lords, contrary to the nature of that Ordinance of
Christ, and to the old Acts of General Assemblies: Their
making merry, and their insolent carriage, at the News of
any prosperous successe of the Popish and Malignant Armies
in any of these Kingdomes: Their drawing of Parties
and Factions, to the weakning of the common Union: Their
spreading of Informations, That Uniformitie in Religion,
and the Presbyterial Government, is not intended by the
Parliament of England: Their Endeavours, Informations, &amp;
Sollicitations, tending to weaken the hearts &amp; hands of others
and to make them withold their assistance from this Work.
</p>

<p>
Let this sort of bosome Enemies, and dis-affected Persons,
be well marked, timely discovered, and carefully
avoided, lest they infuse the poison of their seducing counsels
into the mindes of others: Wherein let Ministers be
faithful, and Presbyteries vigilant and unpartial, as they
will answer the contrary to GOD, and to the General Assembly,
or their Commissioners.
</p>

<p>
The cause and the dangers thereof being thus evidenced,
unlesse men will blot out of their hearts the love of Religion,
and the Cause of GOD, and cast of all care of their Countrey,
Lawes, Liberties, and Estates, yea, all naturall
affection to the preservation of themselves, their Wives,
Children, and Friends, and whosoever is dearest to them
under the Sun (all these being in the visible danger of a present
ruine and destruction) they must now or never appear
actively, each one stretching himself to, yea beyond his
power. It is not time to dally, nor go about the businesse
by halfes, nor by <hi rend='italic'>almost</hi>,
but <hi rend='italic'>altogether</hi> zealous: <hi rend='italic'>Cursed
be he that doth the Work of the Lord negligently, or dealeth
falsly in the Covenant of God.</hi> If we have been so forward to
assist our Neighbour Kingdomes, shall we neglect to defend
our own? Or shall the Enemies of GOD be more active
against his Cause: than his People for it? GOD forbid.
If the Work being so far carried on, shall now mis-carry,
<pb n="282"/><anchor id="Pg282"/>
and fail in our hands, our own consciences shall condemne
us, and posterity shall curse us: But if wee stand stoutly
and stedfastly to it, the <hi rend='italic'>pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in our
hands, and all Generations shall call us blessed.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Let Ministers stir up others by free and faithful preaching,
and by admonishing every one of his duty, as there shall be
occasion: And if it shall be the lot of any of them to fall
under the power of the Enemy, let them through the
strength of Christ, persevere in their integrity, choosing affliction
rather then sin, glorifying GOD, and not fearing
what Flesh can do unto them.
</p>

<p>
Let our Armies beware of ungodlinesse, and worldly
lusts, living godly, soberly, and righteously, avoiding
all scandalous carriage, which may give occasion to others
to think the worse of their Cause and Covenant, and remembring
that the eyes of GOD, Angels, and Men are upon
them: Finally, renouncing all confidence in their own
strength, skill, valour, and number, and trusting only to the
<hi rend='italic'>God of the Armies of Israel</hi>, who hath fought, and will fight
for them.
</p>

<p>
Let all sorts both of high and low degree in this Kingdome,
call to minde their Solemne Covenants, and pay
their vows to the most High; and namely, that Article of
our first Covenant, which obligeth us not to stay nor hinder
any such Resolution, as by common consent shall be found
to conduce for the ends of the Covenant, but by all lawfull
means to further and promove the same; Which lyeth as a
Bond upon peoples consciences, readily to obey such orders,
and willingly to under go such burdens, as by the
publick and common resolution of the Estates of Parliament,
are found necessary for the prosecution of the War;
considering that the Enemy cannot bee suppressed without
a competent number of Forces, and Forces cannot be kept
together without maintenance, and maintenance cannot
be had without such publick Burdens; Which however
for the present, not joyous, but grievous, yet it shall be
no grief of heart afterwards, even unto the common fort,
that they have given some part of their necessary livelyhood,
<pb n="283"/><anchor id="Pg283"/>
for assisting so good a work. It is far from our thoughts,
that the pinching of some, should make others superfluously
to abound: It is rather to bee expected of the richer
sort, that they will spare and defalk, not onely the pride
and superfluity, both of apparel and diet, but also a part
of their lawful allowance in these things, to contribute the
same as a free will offering, beside what they are obliged
to, by Law or publick Order, after the example of godly
<hi rend='italic'>Nehemiah</hi>, who for the space of twelve years, while the
walls of Jerusalem were a building, did not eat the bread of
the Governour, that hee might ease by so much the Peoples
Burthens and Bondage.
</p>

<p>
In our last Covenant, there is another Article which
(without the oblivion or neglect of any of the rest) we
wish may be well remembred at this time; namely, That
we shall assist and defend all that enter into this League and
Covenant, in the maintaining and pursuing thereof and
shall not suffer our selves, directly or indirectly, by whatsoever
Combination, Perswasion, or Terror, to be divided
and withdrawne from this blessed Union and Conjunction,
whether to make defection to the contrary part, or
to give our selves to a detestable indifferency or neutrality
in this Cause: According to which Article, mens Reality
and integrity in the Covenant, will be manifest and demonstrable
as well by their omissions, as by their commissions;
as well by their not doing good, as by their doing of evil;
<hi rend='italic'>He that is not with us, is against us, and he that gathereth not with
us, scattereth.</hi> Whoever he be that will not, according to publick
order and appointment, adventure his person, or send
out these that are under his power, or pay the Contributions
imposed for the maintenance of the Forces, must be taken
for an Enemie, Malignant, and Covenant-breaker, and
so involved both into the displeasure of GOD, and Censures
of the Kirk, and no doubt into civil punishments also
to be inflicted by the State.
</p>

<p>
And if any shall prove so untoward and perfidious, their
iniquitie shall be upon themselves, and they <hi rend='italic'>shall bear their
punishment</hi>: Deliverance and good successe shall follow
<pb n="284"/><anchor id="Pg284"/>
those who with purpose of heart cleave unto the Lord, and
whose hearts are upright toward his glory. When wee look
back upon the great things which GOD hath done for us,
and our former deliverances out of several dangers and difficulties
which appeared to us insuperable, <hi rend='italic'>experience breeds
hope</hi>: And when we consider how in the midst of all our
sorrows and pressures, the <hi rend='italic'>Lord our God hath given us a naile in
his holy place</hi>, and hath lightned our eyes with the desireable
and beautiful sight of his own glory in his Temple, we take
it for an argument that he hath yet <hi rend='italic'>thoughts of peace</hi>, and a
purpose of mercy toward us; <hi rend='italic'>Though for a small moment he hath
forsaken us, yet with great mercies he will gather us</hi> as Hee hath
lifted up our Enemies, that their fall may be the greater,
and that he may cast them downe into desolation for ever. <hi rend='italic'>Arise,
and let us be doing; The Lord of Hosts is with us, the God of Jacob
is our Refuge.</hi>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act against Lykwakes.</hi></head>

<p>
Whereas the corrupt Custome of Lykwakes hath fostered
both Superstition and Profanitie through the Land,
This present Assembly Discharges the same intime comming,
And appoints Presbyteries To take speciall care for
trying and censuring the Transgressors of this Act within
their several Bounds.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act recommending to Sessions To have the
Printed Acts of Assemblie.</hi></head>

<p>
The General Assembly, considering how necessar it is,
That every Session in a Parish have the Acts of the Assembly
for their use, Doth therefore seriously recommend
to every Parish and Session To buy the Printed Acts of the
<pb n="285"/><anchor id="Pg285"/>
Assembly; and Ordains Presbyteries To crave account hereof
from every Minister, before their going to Provinciall
Assemblies: And likewise, That every Provinciall
Assembly, crave account from Presbyteries in their
trials, if every Session be so provided, and that they try
the diligence, of Presbyteries and Ministers used for that
effect.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>13. <hi rend='italic'>Februar. 1645. Postmeridiem.</hi> Sess. Ult.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act for censuring the Observers of Yule-day,
and other superstitious dayes, especially if
they be Schollars.</hi></head>

<p>
The General Assembly taking to their consideration,
The manifold Abuses, Profanitie, and Superstitions,
committed on Yule-day and some other superstitions dayes
following, Have unanimously concluded, and hereby Ordains,
That whatsoever Person or Persons hereafter shall
be found guilty in keeping of the foresaid superstitious
dayes, shall be proceeded against by Kirk Censures, and
shall make their publick Repentance therefore in the face
of the Congregation where the offence is committed: And
that Presbyteries and Provinciall Synods Take particular
notice how Ministers try and censure Delinquents of this
kinde, within the severall Parochines. And because Schollars
and Students give great scandal and offence in this, That
they (being found guilty) be severely disciplined and chastised
therefore by their Masters: And in case the Masters of
Schools or Colledges be accessorie to the said superstitious
profanitie, by their connivence, granting of liberty
of Vacance to their Schollars at that time, or any time
thereafter, in compensation thereof, That the Masters be
summoned by the Ministers of the Place to compeir before
the next ensuing Generall Assembly, there to be
censured according to their trespasse; And if Schollars
<pb n="286"/><anchor id="Pg286"/>
(being guilty) refuse to subject themselves to Correction,
or be Fugitives from Discipline, That they be
not received in any other Schoole or Colledge within the
Kingdom.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act for encouragement of Schollars to Professions
in Schooles.</hi></head>

<p>
In respect of the paucitie of men, fit and willing to professe
Divinitie in the Schooles, by reason that few frame
their studies that way, The Generall Assembly thinks it fit,
That the Provincials diligently consider and try who within
their Bounds most probably may bee for a Profession in the
Schooles, And report their names to the following Generall
Assembly, that such may be stirred up and encouraged
by the General Assembly, to compose and frame their studies,
that they may be fit for such places.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act for restraining Abuses at
Pennie Brydals.</hi></head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly, considering the great profanitie
and severall Abuses which usually fal forth at Pennie-Brydals
proving fruitful Seminaries of all lasciviousnesse
and debausherie, as well by the excessive number of people
conveened thereto, as by the extortion of them therein,
and licentiousnesse thereat, To the great dishonour of
God, the scandall of our Christian Profession, and prejudice
of the Countreys welfare; Therefore they Ordain
every Presbyterie in this Kingdome, To take such special
care for restraining these Abuses flowing from the causes
foresaid, as they shall think fit in their severall bounds
<hi rend='italic'>respectivè</hi>:
And to take a strict accompt of every Minister and
Session of their obedience to the Ordinance of the Presbyteria
<pb n="287"/><anchor id="Pg287"/>
theyeanent, at the Visitation of every Parish Kirk in
their Bounds.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act Discharging deposed Ministers to be
reponed to their former Places.</hi></head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly, considering the manifold prejudices
redounding to the Kirk in Generall, and private
Congregations in particnlar; through the restoring of Ministers
once deposed to the same places wherein formerly
they served: As also, how derogatorie it would prove to the
weight of that sentence of Deposition; Do therefore ordain,
that no Minister deposed, shall be restored again into that
place where formerly he served.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Renovation of the Commission for the publick
Affairs of the Kirk.</hi></head>

<p>
The General Assembly taking to their consideration, That
in respect the great Work of Uniformitie in Religion in
all his Majesties dominions, is not yet perfected, (though
by the Lords blessing there is a good progresse made in the
same) there is a necessity of renewing the Commissions
granted formerly for prosecuting and perfecting that great
Work; Doe therefore Renew the Power and Commission
granted for the publick Affairs of the Kirk by the Generall
Assembly, held in S. Andrews in the year 1642. upon the
fifth day of August <hi rend='italic'>post meridiem</hi>, Sess, 12. And by the Generall
Assembly held in Edinburgh in the year 1643 upon the
19. day of August, Sess. <hi rend='italic'>ult.</hi> And by the late Generall Assembly
held at Edinburgh in the year 1644. upon the third
of June, Sess. 6. to the Persons afternamed, <hi rend='italic'>viz. Mr Andrew
Ramsay, Mr Alexan. Henderson, Mr Robert Douglas, Mr
William Colvil, Mr William Bennet, Mr George Gillespie,
Mr John Oswald, Mr Mungo Law, Mr Robert Lawrie,
<pb n="288"/><anchor id="Pg288"/>
Mr John Adamson, D. John Sharp, Mr George Leslie, Mr
Andrew Fairfowle, Mr David Calderwood, Mr Andrew Blackhall,
Mr James Fleeming, Mr Robert Ker, Mr John Macghie,
Mr John Dalyell, Mr Andrew Stevenson, Mr Robert
Lander, Mr James Robertson, Mr Patrick Sibbald, Mr Robert
Carson, Mr Alex. Spittall, Mr Alex. Dickison, Mr James Smith, Mr
John Gibbison, Mr James Symton, Mr Ephraim Melvill, Mr
Alex. Somervell, Mr Robert Eliot, Mr George Bennet, Mr Robert
Blair, Mr David Forret, Mr Arthur Mortoun, Mr Samuel Rutherfurd,
D. Alex. Colvill, Mr Andrew Bennet, Mr James Wedderburn,
Mr Walter Greg, Mr John Moncreiff, Mr John Smith, Mr
Frederick Carmichaell, Mr Patrick Gillespie, Mr John Duncan,
Mr James Sibbald, Mr Robert Bruce, Mr John Hume at Eccles,
Mr Mungo Dalyell, Mr Alex. Kinneir, Mr Thomas Ramsay, Mr
William Turnbull, Mr James Guthrie, Mr Thomas Donaldson, Mr
William Jameson, Mr David Fletcher, Mr Andrew Dunkison, Mr
Robert Murray, Mr David Weemes, Mr John Hall, Mr John
Freebairn, Mr David Drummond at Creist, Mr George Murray, Mr
Henry Guthrie, Mr Robert Wright, Mr Andrew Jaffray, Mr Bernard
Sanderson, Mr Alex. Iran, Mr Thomas Chalmers, Mr Andrew
Lawder, Mr Hugh Henderson, Mr John Levingstoun, Mr
James Blair, Mr James Bonar, Mr John Burne, Mr John Bell, Mr
Hugh Mackale, Mr Matthew Birsbane, Mr David Elphingstoun,
Mr David Dickson, Mr George Young, D. John Strang, Mr
Robert Baillie, Mr Patrick Sharp, Mr Robert Birnie, Mr
Evan Camron, Mr George Symmer at Megle, Mr Andrew
Fleck, Mr Patrick Lyon, Mr John Lindsay, Mr Sylvester
Lammie, Mr George Fogo, Mr David Strachan, Mr Andrew
Cant, Mr William More, Mr William Davidson, Mr John
Paterson, Mr William Jaffray, Mr Thomas Mitchell, Mr George
Cummin, Mr Joseph Brodie, Mr William Lawder, Mr David
Rosse, Mr Ferquhard Mackleman,</hi> Ministers; And <hi rend='italic'>Archbald</hi>
Marquesse of Argyle, <hi rend='italic'>John</hi> Earle of Crawfurd-Lindsay,
<hi rend='italic'>Alexander</hi> Earle of Eglintoun, <hi rend='italic'>William</hi>
Earle of Glencarne, <hi rend='italic'>John</hi> Earle of Cassils,
<hi rend='italic'>Charles</hi> Earle of Dumfermling, <hi rend='italic'>James</hi>
Earle of Tullibarein, <hi rend='italic'>John</hi> Earle of Lauderdale,
<hi rend='italic'>James</hi> Earle of Annandale, <hi rend='italic'>William</hi>
Earle of Lothian, <hi rend='italic'>James</hi> Earle of
Queenesberry, <hi rend='italic'>William</hi> Earle of Dalhousie,
<hi rend='italic'>William</hi> Earle of Lanerick,
<hi rend='italic'>Archbald</hi> Lord Angus,
<pb n="289"/><anchor id="Pg289"/>
Vicount of Arbuthnet, <hi rend='italic'>James</hi> Vicount of Frendraught,
<hi rend='italic'>Alexander</hi> Lord Carleys, <hi rend='italic'>James</hi>
Lord Johnstoun, <hi rend='italic'>John</hi> Lord Yester, <hi rend='italic'>John</hi>
Lord Balmerino, <hi rend='italic'>Alexander</hi> Lord Balcarras,
<hi rend='italic'>John</hi> Lord Loure, <hi rend='italic'>John</hi> Lord Barganie,
Sir <hi rend='italic'>Patrick Hepburn</hi> of Wauchtoun,
Sir <hi rend='italic'>John Hope</hi> of Craighall, Sir <hi rend='italic'>Archbald
Johnstoun</hi> of Waristoun, Sir <hi rend='italic'>David Hume</hi> of Wedderburn,
Sir <hi rend='italic'>Frederick Lyon</hi> of Brigtoun,
Sir <hi rend='italic'>Alexander Areskine</hi> of
Dun, Sir <hi rend='italic'>Alexander Fraser</hi> of Phillorth,
<hi rend='italic'>Sir William Baillie</hi> of Lammingroun,
<hi rend='italic'>Hadding</hi> of Glennegies,
Sir <hi rend='italic'>Thomas Ruthven</hi> of Freeland,
<hi rend='italic'>James Macdougall</hi> of Garthland,
Sir <hi rend='italic'>Alexander Murray</hi> of Blackbarronie, <hi rend='italic'>William
Drummond</hi> of Rickartoun, Sir <hi rend='italic'>William Scot</hi> of Hardin, Sir
<hi rend='italic'>Andrew Ker</hi> of Greenhead,
Sir <hi rend='italic'>William Stuart</hi>, Sir <hi rend='italic'>Alexander Schaw</hi>
of Sauchie, <hi rend='italic'>Alexander Brodie</hi> of that Ilk, Mr
<hi rend='italic'>George Hume</hi> of Kimmerjame, Sir <hi rend='italic'>John Smith</hi>,
Mr <hi rend='italic'>Alexander Colvill</hi> Justice Depute,
<hi rend='italic'>John Binnie</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Archbald Sydsers</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Laurence Henderson</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>James Stuart
Gilbert Sommernell</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>John Semple,</hi>
Mr <hi rend='italic'>Robert Barclay, Patrick Leslie</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>James Law</hi>, Mr <hi rend='italic'>Robert Cuninghame</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>George Gardin</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>William Glendunning</hi> Elders.
And for discharging the said Commission, Appoints
the persons aforesaid, or any ninteene of them, whereof
fifteen shall be Ministers, to meet at Edinburgh upon the
14. of this moneth of February and upon the second Wednesday
of May, August, November, and of February
next to come, and upon any other day, or in any other
Place they shall think meet. Giving unto them full power
and Commission to do all and every thing for prosecuting,
advancing, perfecting, and bringing the said Work of Uniformity
in Religion in all his Majesties Dominions to an
happy conclusion, conforme to the former Commissions
granted by the saids Assemblies thereanent: And further,
Renewes to the Persons afore-named, the power contained
in the Act of the said Assembly, 1643 Intituled, <hi rend='italic'>A reference to
the Commission anent the Persons designed to repair to the
Kingdom of England</hi>, As also the power contained in two
several Acts of the said late Assembly 1644. Sess. 16. made <hi rend='italic'>Against
secret dis-affecters of the Covenant</hi>, and, <hi rend='italic'>For sending Ministers
to the Army</hi>. With full power to them, to treat and
determine in the matters aforesaid, &amp; in all other matters referred
<pb n="290"/><anchor id="Pg290"/>
unto them by this Assembly, as fully and freely, as if
the same were here particularly expressed, and with as ample
power as any Commission of former General Assemblies
hath had, or been in use of before; They being alwayes for
their whole proceedings countable to, and censurable by the
next General Assembly.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Renovation of the Commission to the Persons
appointed to repair to the Kingdom, of</hi> England,
<hi rend='italic'>for prosecuting the Treaty of
Uniformitie in Religion.</hi></head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly, Taking to their consideration,
that the Treaty of Uniformity in Religion in all his Majesties
Dominions is not yet perfected, though by the
Lords blessing there is a good progresse made in the same,
Do therefore Renew the Power and Commission granted
to the Persons formerly nominate by the two preceding
Assemblies, and by their Commissioners sitting at Edinburgh,
for prosecuting the said Treatie of Uniformitie with
the Honourable Houses of the Parliament of England, and
the Reverend Assembly of Divines there, or any Committees
appointed by them. Giving unto them full power
to do all and every thing which may advance, perfect,
and bring the said Treatie to an happy conclusion conforme
to the former Commissions granted to them thereanent.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>The General Assemblies Answer to the Right
Reverend the Assembly of Divines in the Kirk
of England.</hi></head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Right Reverend and welbeloved in the Lord Jesus,</hi>
</p>

<p>
Amidst the manifold troubles in which this Kingdome
hath been involved, and under which it still laboureth,
we greatly rejoyced when it was testified unto by us
<pb n="291"/><anchor id="Pg291"/>
our reverend Brethren, and under your hands in your Letter,
and these Papers by them presented to us from you,
what progresse you had made in the much desired Work of
Uniformities and acknowledge that the same hath <hi rend='italic'>comforted
us concerning our work and toile of our hands</hi>, and seemeth to us as
an olive branch, to prognosticate the abating of the waters,
which overflow the face of the Earth.
</p>

<p>
When we consider, that you have walked in pathes unusuall,
which have not been haunted by Travellers there,
as the publick way, though pointed out as the good old way
by the Reformed Kirks, we do not wonder that you have
carefully adverted in every step to set foot upon sure ground;
When we behold that strong and high tree of Episcopacie
so deeply rooted by continuance of time not loosed of the
Branches, and the <hi rend='italic'>stumpe of the root left in the Earth, with a
band of iron and brasse</hi>, but pluckt up by the roots; We do
confesse that the Carpenters, though prepared have a hard
task, requiring time to hew it down, and root it up: And
when we call to minde how much the Service-Book hath
been cryed up as the only way of GODS Worship, how
many thereby have had their wealth, and how difficult it is
to forgoe the accustomed way; We admire the power and
wisdom of the good GOD who hath prospered you in
your way, and led you this length, through so many
straits, and over so many difficulties in so troublous a
time.
</p>

<p>
We do for our part not only admit and allow, but most
heartily and gladly embrace the Directory of Worship, as a
common Rule for the Kirks of GOD in the three Kingdoms,
now more straitly and firmly united by the solemne
League and Covenant; And we do all in one voice blesse
the Lord, who hath put it in the hearts, first, of the Reverend,
Learned, and Pious Assembly of Divines and
then, of the Honourable Houses of Parliament. To agree
upon such a Directory as doth remove what is none of
Christs, and preserve the purity of all his Ordinances, together
with Uniformity and Peace in the Kirk. Only we
have thought necessary, to declare and make known, That
the Clause in the Directory for the administration of the
<pb n="292"/><anchor id="Pg292"/>
Lords Supper, which appointeth the Table to be so placed
that the Communicants may orderly sit about it, or at it, is
not to be interpreted as if in the judgement of this Kirk it
were indifferent for any of the Communicants not to come
to and receive at the Table; or as if we did approve the distributing
of the Elements by the Ministers to each Communicant,
&amp; not by the Communicants among themselves: In
which particulars, we still conceive and believe the order &amp;
practice of our own Kirk, To be most agreeable &amp; sutable to
the Word of GOD, the example of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and the nature of that Heavenly Feast and Table. Neverthelesse,
in other particulars we have resolved, and do
agree, to do as ye have desired us in your Letter, That is,
not to be tenacious of old Customs, though lawfull in themselves,
and not condemned in this Directory, but to lay
them aside for the nearer Uniformitie with the Kirk of England,
now nearer and dearer to us than ever before; A
Blessing so much esteemed, and so earnestly longed for among
us, that rather than it faile on our part, we do most
willingly part with such practices and customs of our own,
as may be parted with safely, and without the violation of
any of Christs Ordinances, or trespassing against Scripturall
Rules, or our solemne Covenants.
</p>

<p>
We do in like manner agree to, and approve the Proportions
touching Kirk-government and Ordination; and
have given power to our Commissioners who are to meet in
Edinburgh, to agree to, and conclude in our Name an
Uniformitie therein, betwixt the Kirks in both Kingdoms,
so soon as the same shall be without any substantiall alteration
Ratified by an Ordinance of the Honourable Houses
of the Parliament of England according to our Act of
Approbation sent to our Commissioners with you.
</p>

<p>
As for the returning of our Commissioners; though the
counsel and assistance of our Reverend Brethren might be of
good use to us in these difficult times, and their particular
stations and imployments importune the stay of these who
are come unto us, and the returne of these who stay with
you, yet preferring the publick good, and looking upon
the profit may redound unto all by their continuing with
<pb n="293"/><anchor id="Pg293"/>
you, we have satisfied your desire, &amp; renewed their Commission;
Praying GOD they may (as we are confident they shall)
prove answerable to our trust, and to your expectation.
</p>

<p>
Concerning one Confession of Faith, and Forme of
Catechisme, we apprehend no great difficultie: And to
that which remains to be perfected in the matter of Kirk-government,
we do believe, and both you and we know by
experience, that <hi rend='italic'>there is no
word impossible with</hi> our <hi rend='italic'>God. He
that hath begun a good work among you, will also perform it</hi> of his
good pleasure. Go on in the Lord your strength, and <hi rend='italic'>the
Spirit of truth lead you in all truth: The God of all grace and peace
that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus that great Shepherd
of the sheep through the blood of the everlasting Covenant</hi>, &amp; by him
<hi rend='italic'>hath called us unto his eternall glory, make you perfect in every good
work to do his will, working in you, and by you, and among you, that
which is well pleasing in his fight, stablish, strengthen, settle you,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh 13. Feb.
1645.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Subscribed in name of the Generall
Assembly of the Kirk of Scotland,
by the Moderator of the
Assembly.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>The humble Remonstrance of the Generall Assembly
of the Kirk of</hi> Scotland, <hi rend='italic'>met at Edinburgh
the 13. day of February, 1645.</hi></head>

<p>
TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT
MAJESTIE.
</p>

<p>
As our Record is on high, and our conferences within us
bear us witnesse, so the many former Supplications and
Remonstrances to your Majestie, from this Kirk and Kingdome,
our solemne Covenants, and the whole course of
our proceedings from time to time in the prosecution
of this Cause; Do make known to the World, and we trust
<pb n="294"/><anchor id="Pg294"/>
also to your own consience, our loyaltie and faithful subjection,
and how far our intentions are from the diminution
of your Majesties just Power and Greatnesse; And although
the successe of many of our humble addresses to your Majesty,
hath been such as did frustrate our desires and hopes,
yet this hath not blotted our of our hearts our loyaltie, so
often professed before God and the World; but it is still our
Souls desire, and our Prayer to God for you, that your
Self and your Posterity may prosperously reigne over this
your antient and Native Kingdome, and over your other
Dominions. And now as we have published a solemn and
free Warning to the Noblemen, Barons, Gentlemen,
Burrons, Ministers, and Commons of this Kingdome,
concerning the present affliction of this Nation, and their
sins procuring the same; So when we call to minde, that
God accepteth not the persons of men, and that the greatest
are not to be winked at in their sins; We assure our selves,
that the best and most reall testimony which we can
give at this present of the tendernesse and uprightnesse of
our affection to your Majesties true Happinesse is this our
humble and faithfull Representation of your Majesties great
and growing dangers, and the causes thereof. Of which,
if we should be silent, our consciences would condemne
us, and <hi rend='italic'>the stones themselves would immediatly cry out</hi>.
</p>

<p>
The troubles of our hearts are enlarged, &amp; our fear increased
in your Majesties behalf, perceiving that your Peoples patience
is above measure tempted, &amp; is like a cart prest down
with sheaves, and ready to break, while as beside many
former designes and endeavours to bring desolation and destruction
upon us, (which were (and we trust all of that
kinde shall be) by the marvellous and mercifull providence
of God discovered and disappointed). Our Countrey is now
infested, the blood of divers of our Brethern spilt, and
other acts of most barbarous and horrid cruelty exercised,
by the cursed crew of the Irish Rebels and their Complices
in the Kingdome, under the conduct of such as have
Commission and Warrant from your Majestie. And
unless we prove unfaithfull both to God and to your
Majestie, we cannot conceale another danger which is infinitely
<pb n="295"/><anchor id="Pg295"/>
greater than that of your Peoples displeasure: Therefore
we the servants of the most high GOD, and your
Majesties most loyall Subjects in the humility and grief of
our hearts, fall down before your Throne, and in the
Name of our Lord and Master JESUS CHRIST,
who shall judge the world in righteousnesse, both great
and small, and in the Name of this whole Nationall Kirk,
which we represent, We make bold to warn your Majesty
freely, that the guilt which cleaveth fast to your Majesty
and to your Throne, is such, as (whatsoever flattering
preachers, or unfaithfull counsellours may say to the contrary)
if not timely repented, cannot but involve your
Self and your Posterity under the wrath of the ever-living
GOD, For your being guiltie of the shedding of the blood
of many thousands of your Majesties best Subjects; For
your permitting the Masse, and other Idolatry, both in
your own Family and in your Dominions; For your authorizing
by the Book of Sports the profanation of the Lords
Day; For your not punishing of publick scandals, and
much profanenesse in, &amp; about your Court; For the shutting
of your eare, from the humble and just desires of your
faithfull Subjects; For your complying too much with the
Popish party in many wayes, and namely, by concluding
the Cessation of Armes in <hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi>, and your embracing the
counsels of those who have not set GOD nor your good
before their eyes; For your resisting and opposing this
Cause, which so much concerneth the glory of GOD,
your own honour and happinesse, and the peace and safetie
of your Kingdomes; and for what other causes your Majesty
is most conscious, and may best judge and search your
own conscience (nor would we have mentioned any particulars,
if they had not been publike and knowne.) For
all which it is high time for your Majesty to fall down at the
footstool of the King of Glory, to acknowledge your offence
to repent timely, to make your peace with GOD through
JESUS CHRIST, (whose blood is able to wash away
your great sinne) and to be no longer unwilling that the Son
of GOD reign over you and your Kingdoms in his pure
Ordinances of Church-government and Worship. These
<pb n="296"/><anchor id="Pg296"/>
things if your Majesty do, it shall be no grief of heart unto
you afterward; a blessing is reserved for you, and you
shall finde favour with GOD, and with your People,
and with all the Churches of Christ; But if your Majesty
refuse to hearken to this wholsome counsell (which the
Lord forbid) we have discharged our own consciences,
we take GOD and Men to witnesse That we are blamelesse
of the sad Consequences which may follow, and we
shall wait upon the Lord, who, <hi rend='italic'>when he maketh inquisition
for blood, will not forget the cry of the humble</hi>. In the mean while,
beseeching your Majesty to take notice That we are not
staggering or fainting through diffidence of the successe of
this Cause and Covenant of the three Kingdoms, unto
which, as GOD hath already given manifold Testimonies
of his favour and blessing; so it is our stedfast and unshaken
confidence, that this is the Work and Cause of GOD,
which shall gloriously prevail against all opposition, and
from which, with the assistance of the grace of GOD,
we shall never suffer our selves to be divided or withdrawn,
but shall zealously and constantly in our severall Vocations,
endeavour with our Estates and Lives, the pursuing and
promoving thereof.
</p>

<p>
That which we have concluded concerning Uniformity
in Religion between both Kingdoms, is to be humbly offered
to your Majestie from the Commissioners of this
Kingdom, for your Royall Consent and Ratification. Although
your Majestie was not pleased to vouchsafe us the
presence of your Commissioner, according to the supplication
of the Commissioners or the preceeding Generall Assembly,
yet we have proceeded with as much respect to
your Majesties honour, and as much remembrance of our
duty, as if your Royall Person had been present in the mids
of us: And we shall still continue our Prayers for you,
that GOD would graciously incline your heart to the
counsels of Truth and Peace, and grant unto your Majestie
a long and happy Raign, that we may live under you a peaceable
and quiet life, in all Godlinesse and Honestie.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="297"/><anchor id="Pg297"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>The Assemblies Answer to their Commissioners
at</hi> London.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Reverend and beloved Brethren,</hi>
</p>

<p>
These sweet Fruits of your long continued Labours in
the Work of the Lord entrusted to you, brought to
us at this time by these two of your number, whom you
were pleased to send, were received by us with no small joy
and rejoycing, as being, in great part, the satisfaction of
our Souls desire, in that so much longed for, so much prayed
for happy Uniformity of these Kirks and Kingdoms:
And an evident Demonstration to us, that the Lord hath
not, even in this time of his seen and felt displeasure, so
covered himself with the cloud of his anger, that our Prayers
should not passe through.
</p>

<p>
The great and main difficulties through which the Lord
hath carried this Work, as we do acknowledge, ought
mainly to be made use of, for the praise and glory of his
power, who is the great Worker of all our works for us;
So your overcoming of them is to us no small Demonstration
of your zeal, wisdom, and faithfulnesse, which without
great Injurie both to the Lord the prime Worker, and
to you his instruments, we cannot but acknowledge, hath
been much manifested in the whole managing of this work
in your hands.
</p>

<p>
The full answer to all the particulars you write of in your
Letters, we leave to the Relation of those that come from
you, and are now appointed to return to you: And as with
much thankfulnesse we acknowledge your fidelity in what
ye have done already; so we have again renewed your Commission
for the continuance of your Imployment there, for
the perfecting of the Work so happily begun: For the furthering
whereof, as we shall not be wanting in our prayers
to GOD for his blessing upon your labours, so for your
help and assistance, we have appointed a commission to sit
at Edinburgh, to which at all occasions you may have your
recourse, as the exigence of the Work shall require.
</p>

<pb n="298"/><anchor id="Pg298"/>

<p>
How satisfactory that Directory of Worship presented to
us by our Brethren from you, was to us, we leave it rather
to their relation at their return; being ear and eye witnesses
to the manifold expressions of our joy and gladnesse,
then offer to represent it to you in a Letter: The Act herewith
sent, and ordained to be prefixed unto the Directory,
will sufficiently declare our hearty approbation of it: Our
judgement also concerning the proportions of Government
and Ordination, and our earnest desire to have the Work of
Uniformity promoved and perfected in that particular also,
will appear to you by the other Act which herewith you will
receive: Our zeal and desire to have that Work fully closed
with so much harmonie as becometh the work of GOD,
will appear to you in our resolution and answer to that particular
in the point of Excommunication, concerning which
you write.
</p>

<p>
These particular differences hinted in the Assemblies
Letter, for uniformitie with that Kirk so much endeared to
us, we have resolved to lay aside, and have taken course
for preserving harmonie amongst our selves, whereof our
Brethren will give you more particular account. Anent
your desire of <hi rend='italic'>Mr Alexander Henderson</hi> his attending the Treatie,
we are confident ere this you have received our resolution.
</p>

<p>
Amidst the many difficulties wherewith it pleaseth the
Lord to presse us, as we thought it necessar to publish and
send forth a Warning to all sorts of Persons in this Kirk and
Kingdom, concerning the present affliction of this Nation,
and their sins procuring the same; So we thought it incumbent
to us in duty, as the best Testimony which we can give
at this present to his Majesty, to remonstrate unto him
faithfully The great and growing dangers his Majesty is now
under, and the causes thereof. This Remonstrance we
have sent to you, to be presented to his Majesty, by such
means, and at such time, as you who are there upon the
place shall judge fittest.
</p>

<p>
And now dear Brethren go on with cheerfulnesse in the
Work of the Lord: Let no discouragement or opposition
make your heart to faint, or your hands wax feeble: Perswade
<pb n="299"/><anchor id="Pg299"/>
your self the Lords hand shall still be made known toward
his servants, and his indignation against his Enemies.
Remember the Work is his, who useth not to begin, but
also to make and end, and is abundantly able to supply all
your need according to the riches of his glory. Be confident
therefore of this thing, that he who hath begun this good
Work by you, will also in due time accomplish it to his
own praise. To his gracious assistance we heartily recommend
you.
</p>

<p>
Postscript.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh 13. Feb. 1645.</hi>
</p>

<p>
It is earnestly desired That the Directorie for
Worship be sent to Ireland, and that you recommend
to the honourable Houses of the
Parliament, To think upon the best way for
the establishment &amp; practice of it in that Kingdom.
And that the like course may be taken
with the government, and other parts of the
Uniformity, so soon as they shall be agreed
upon.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Subscribed in name of the Generall Assembly of the Kirk of
Scotland by the Moderator of the Assembly.</hi>
</p>

<p>
The General Assembly Recommends to Presbyteries,
To consider these matters referred to their
consideration by preceding Assemblies; and to report
their judgement therein to the next Assembly.
</p>

</div>

<div>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Generall Assembly Appoints the meeting of the
next Assembly to be at Edinburgh the first Wednesday
of June, in the yeer 1646.</hi>
</p>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<pb n="300"/><anchor id="Pg300"/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>The Generall Assembly Met at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi> Junii 3. 1646.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Edinb. 4. Junii 1646. Sess. 2.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>The Kings Letter to the Assembly,
presented by M.</hi> Robert Douglas
<hi rend='italic'>Minister at Edinburgh.</hi></head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Charles R.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Right trustly and welbeloved, We greet you
well. Having lately written to Our Houses of
Parliament at <hi rend='italic'>Westminster</hi>, and the Commissioners
from Our Kingdom of <hi rend='italic'>Scotland</hi> at <hi rend='italic'>London</hi>,
and likewise to the Committees of Estates of
that our Kingdom; Shewing Our great sense and grief for
the sad effects have flowed from the unhappy differences
betwixt Us and Our Subjects; with Our reall resolutions
to comply with the desires of Our Parliaments of both Kingdoms,
and those entrusted by them for settling of Trueth
and Peace in all Our Dominions: And now being informed
of your meeting, We have thought fit hereby (since We
could not conveniently send a Commissioner) to give you
<pb n="301"/><anchor id="Pg301"/>
the same assurances; And withall, that it shall be Our constant
endeavour to maintain Religion there, as it is established,
in Doctrine, Worship, and Church-government,
and leave no good means unassayed for setling an
universall Peace in that our native and ancient Kingdom,
with the Reformation and Religion, and settling Peace in
<hi rend='italic'>England</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi>:
And after the return of an answer to
Our late Message to Our Houses of Parliament heer, We
shall more particularly acquaint you, or your Commissioners,
with Our further resolutions. In the mean time,
We seriously recommend Our selves and distracted condition
of Our Kingdoms, to your most earnest Prayers to God
in our behalf, expecting from you faithfulnesse in your severall
Charges and Callings, with that Loyaltie and obedience
which becometh the Ministers of the Gospel. We
bid you very heartily farewell, from <hi rend='italic'>New-castle</hi>, the 28, of
May 1646,
</p>

<p>
DIRECT.
</p>

<p>
For Our right trustie and welbeloved, The Moderatour
and other Members of the Generall Assembly of the
Kirk of Our Kingdom of <hi rend='italic'>Scotland</hi>.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>6. Junii 1646. Antemeridiem.</hi> Sess. 4.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act concerning the Registers and Acts of
Provinciall Assemblies.</hi></head>

<p>
The Assembly recommends to Provinciall Assemblies,
that hereafter they cause read all their Acts,
before the dissolving of every Assembly; And that
their Registers be written formally, and in a good hand
writing, with the severall Leafes or Pages thereof marked
by ciphers according to their number.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n="302"/><anchor id="Pg302"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>11. <hi rend='italic'>Junii 1646. Antemeridiem</hi> Sess. 7.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act concerning the publike satisfaction of
Married persons, for Fornication committed
before Marriage.</hi></head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly understanding that in many
places the publike scandals of Fornication committed
before Marriage, are not taken notice of and removed
by publike confession according to the order of this
Kirk; Therefore for remedie thereof do Ordain, That
all Married persons under publike scandall of Fornication,
committed before their Marriage (although the scandall
thereof hath not appeared before the Marriage) shall satisfie
publikely for that sin committed before their Marriage,
their being in the estate of Marriage notwithstanding, And
that in the same manner as they should have done if they
were not Maried.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>13. Junii 1646. Antemeridiem.</hi> Sess. 10.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Ordinance for Excommunication of the
Earle of Seafort.</hi></head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly having taken to their serious
consideration, that perfidious Band made and contrived
lately in the North, under the name of <hi rend='italic'>An humble Remonstrance</hi>,
against our Nationall Covenant, and the League
and Covenant of the three Kingdoms; Which tendeth
to the making of division and fomenting of Jealousie
within this and between both Kingdoms, to the prolonging
of these unnaturall Warrs, to the impeding of the intended
Uniformity in Religion, and to the subversion of
all the happie ends of our covenants: And finding that
<hi rend='italic'>George</hi> Earle of Seafort hes not only most perfidiously himself
subscribed the said wicked Band, contrary to his solemne
<pb n="303"/><anchor id="Pg303"/>
Oaths in the Covenants aforesaid, and most arrogantly,
owned the same under his owne hand writing in his letters
to the Committee of Estates, and to the Commissioners of
the preceding Assemblie; But also hes seduced and threatned
others to subscribe that divisive Band, and to joyne
with him in prosecution of his treacherous and wicked designes,
therein masked with the pretences of Religion and libertie;
boasting also the pursuance of that his Remonstrance
against all deadly the opposers thereof, whether King or Parliament.
And having also considered another wicked and
treacherous Band of Union which the said Earle formerly
entred into with that excommunicate Rebell <hi rend='italic'>James Grahame</hi>,
after the sentence of forfalture and the dreadfull sentence of
excommunication were pronounced against him, Oblieging
himself therein under solomne Oaths to joyne with that
forfaulted Rebell against this Kirk and Kingdome, and to
oppose all their publike resolutions for pursuance of the
happie ends of our said Covenants. All which, with his
vile reproachfull aspersions and most false calumnies against
this Kirk and State, and their publike and lawfull endeavours
and resolutions, with his other wicked and perfidious
practises at length discovered in the Proclamation of the
Committee of Estates, and the Declaration of the Commission
of the Assembly against the said perfidious Band and
Remonstrance, being gravely pondered and considered;
Together with his base treachery to the Estates, being intrusted
by them with ample Comission, and encouraged and
enabled for discharging thereof, with Mony Ammunition
and Arms in a good measure; Notwithstanding whereof contrary
to that great trust reposed in him. It is notour that not
only he did not joyne with the Forces raised for the defence
of this Kingdome, But rather on the contrary, actually
joining himself and his Forces with that excommunicate
Rebel <hi rend='italic'>James Grahame</hi>, and these unnatural bloody Rebels
his followers, did beleager Invernesse, a Towne Garrisoned
by the Estates for the Defence of that part of the Country.
And the Assembly, having also found that fair
means have been used for reclaiming of the said Earle
from that wicked and perfidious course, by publike Declarations
<pb n="304"/><anchor id="Pg304"/>
and Proclamations, and particular Letters sent to himself
from those that had power in that behalf, And that notwithstanding
thereof and of Summonds direct against him
to answer to the premisses, often called, he doth not appear,
but still remains obstinate in his wicked courses. And after
mature deliberation having found his frequent fearful and
grosse perjuries, his perfidious and wicked conspiracies by
Band and Oath, with the publike Enemies of this Kirk and
Kingdom, and his other treacherous and wicked practises
contemptuously and pertinaciously persisted into, To be
heinous offences against God, and high contempt of all
Ecclesiastical and Civil authority. Therefore the Assembly
moved with the Zeal of God, do without a contrary
voice Decerne and Ordain the said <hi rend='italic'>George</hi> Earle of Seafort
to be summarly excommunicate, and declared to be one
whom Christ commandeth to be holden by all and every
one of the Faithful as an Ethnik and Publicane, and appoints
the sentence of excommunication to be pronounced by
Matter <hi rend='italic'>Robert Blair</hi> Moderator in the east Kirk of this Citie,
upon the next Lords day, being the 14 of this Moneth;
And that thereafter publike intimation be made thereof
upon a Sabbath day before noone in all the Kirks of
this Kingdom so soon as advertisement shall come unto
them.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Enormities and Corruptions observed to be in
the Ministery, with the Remedies thereof.</hi></head>

<p>
ENORMITIES.
</p>

<p>
The first and main sin, reaching both to our personall
carriage and callings, we judge to be, Not studying
how to keep Communion and Fellowship with God in
Christ, but walking in a naturall way without imploying of
Christ, or drawing vertue from him, to inable us unto
sanctification, and Preaching in spirit and power.
</p>

<pb n="305"/><anchor id="Pg305"/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>In our Lives.</hi>
</p>

<p>
1. Much fruitlesse conversing in companie, and complying
with the sins of all sorts, not behaving our
selves as becomes the men of God.
</p>

<p>
2. Great worldlinesse is to be found amongst us, minding
and speaking most about things of this life, being busied
about many things, but forgetting the main.
</p>

<p>
3. Slighting of Gods worship in their families, and therefore
no cordiall urging of it upon others: yea, altogether
a wanting of it in some, if it be credible.
</p>

<p>
4. Want of gravity in carriage and apparell, dissolutenesse
in haire, and shaking about the knees, lightnesse in
the apparrell of their wives and children.
</p>

<p>
5. Tippling and bearing companie in untimous drinking
inn Tavernes and Ale houses, or any where else, whereby
the Ministerie is made vile and contemptible.
</p>

<p>
6. Discountenancing of the godly; speaking ill of
them, because of some that are unanswerable to their profession.
</p>

<p>
7. The Sabbath not sanctified after Sermons, which
maketh people think that the Sabbath is ended with the
Sermon.
</p>

<p>
8. There are also to be found amongst us, who use
small and minced oaths.
</p>

<p>
9. Some so great strangers to Scripture, that except in
their publike Ministerie, though they read many things,
yet they are little conversant in the Scripture, and in meditation
thereof. A dutie incumbent to all the people of God.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>In our Callings.</hi>
</p>

<p>
1. Corrupt entry into the Ministrie in former times, and
following the course of defection, though forsaken,
yet never seriously repented: as also present entring into
the Ministery, as to a way of living in the world, and not
as to a spirituall calling.
</p>

<pb n="306"/><anchor id="Pg306"/>

<p>
2. Helping in, and holding in of insufficient and suspected
men, who favour the things of this life and keeping
the door straiter on them whom God hath sealed, then upon
these who have lesse evidence of the power of grace and
holinesse.
</p>

<p>
3. Partiality in favouring, and speaking for the scandalous,
whether Ministers or other persons, teaching them
how to shift and delay censures.
</p>

<p>
4. Silence in the publike cause, not labouring to cure
the disaffection of people, not urging them to constancie
and patience in bearing of publike burdens, nor to forwardnesse
in the publike Cause; whereby Malignants are multiplied:
yea some are so grosse herein, that even in publike
Fasts little or nothing is to be heard from them sounding
this way.
</p>

<p>
5. Some account it a point of wisdome to speak ambiguously:
some incline to justifie the wicked cause, uttering
words which favour of disaffection: and all their complaining
of the times, is in such a way as may steal the hearts of
people from liking of good Instruments in this work, and
consequently from Gods Cause: yea, some reading publike
Orders, are ready to speak against them in their private
conferences.
</p>

<p>
6. Idlenesse, either in seldome Preaching, as once on
The Lords day, or in preparation for publike duties, not
being given to reading and meditation: others have but fits
of paines, not like other Tradesmen continually at their
work.
</p>

<p>
7. Want of zeal, and love to the conversion of souls,
not being weighted with the want of successe in reclaiming
of sinners, nor searching in themselves the cause of not
profiting, preaching <hi rend='italic'>ex officio</hi>;
nor <hi rend='italic'>ex conscientia officii</hi>.
</p>

<p>
8. Self-seeking in preaching, and a venting rather of
their wit and skill, then a Shewing foorth of the wisdome
and power of God.
</p>

<p>
9. Lifelesnesse in preaching, not studying to be furnished
by Christ with power; and so the ordinance of God teacheth
not to the conscience: and thereto belongeth the not
applying of the doctrine unto the auditory and times.
</p>

<pb n="307"/><anchor id="Pg307"/>

<p>
10. The indiscreet curing of the indiscretion of pious
people and Ministers, whereby godlinesse hath gotten a
deep wound, and profanitie hath lifted up the head, contrary
to that wise and gracious order set foorth in the Generall
Assembly holden at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, 1641.
</p>

<p>
11. Little care to furnish our Armie, either abroad or at
home with Ministers; One of our grievous sins and causes
of our calamity.
</p>

<p>
12. Last, it is to be feared that Ministers in secret are
negligent to wrestle in Prayer, for a blessing to be poured
out upon their labours, contenting themselves with their
publike performances.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Remedies.</hi>
</p>

<p>
1. First, That Presbyteries make great conscience to
have all vacant places within their several bounds filled
with godly and able men, where ever they be to be found:
and that under pretence of being a helper, or second to another,
none be taken in, but such as are able for the
same charge.
</p>

<p>
2. Whereas it is known, that private tryall in Presbyteries
are for the most part perfunctorious, the Brethren are
hereby exhorted to be more serious, and faithfull herein,
as they will be answerable to Christ, the Chief Shepherd:
and in a way previous thereto, that Brethren be free, in
loving admonition one of another secretly, from time to
time; and that whosoever keeps not the Presbyterie or Synod,
after grave admonitions may come under further
censures.
</p>

<p>
3. That accuracie be used as visitation of Kirks, and that
the Elders one by one (the rest being removed) be called
in, and examined upon oath upon the Ministers behaviour
in his calling and conversation.
</p>

<p>
4. That course be taken to divide Congregations in parts,
and by the help not only of Elders in their severall parts,
but of neighbors also, the evils, and neglect of persons
and families, may be found out and remedied.
</p>

<pb n="308"/><anchor id="Pg308"/>

<p>
5. That every Minister be humbled for his former failings,
and make his peace with God, that the more effectually he
may preach repentance, and may stand in the gap, to turne
away the Lords wrath: runing between the Porch and the
Altar, fighing and crying for all the abominations of the
land.
</p>

<p>
6. Speciall care would be had, that Ministers have their
conversation in heaven, mainly minding the things of God,
and exercising faith for drawing life out of Jesus Christ the
fountain of life, arming themselves thereby with power against
the contagion and wickednesse of the world.
</p>

<p>
7. Care would be had of godly conference in Presbyteries,
even in time of their refreshment, and the
Moderator is to look to it, that good matter be furnished
thereto.
</p>

<p>
8. It is also very necessary for every Minister that would
be fruitfull in the work of the Lord, to bring home the
Word of God to his own heart and conscience, by Prayer
and Meditation, both before and after the publike ordinance.
</p>

<p>
9. Use would be made of the roll of the Parish, not onely
for examination, but also for considering the severall
conditions and dispositions of the people, that accordingly
they may be admonished, and particularly prayed for by the
Ministers in secret.
</p>

<p>
10. It is very expedient that Ministers have more communion
among themselves for their mutuall stirring up, and
strengthening of their hands in the Lords work, and rectifying
of these who are not incorrigible.
</p>

<p>
11. That Ministers in all sorts of companie labour to bee
fruitfull, as the Salt of the earth, seasoning them they meet
with, not only forbearing to drink healths (Satans snare,
leading to excesse) but reproving it in others.
</p>

<p>
12. All Ministers would be carefull to cherish the smoaking
flax of weak beginnings in the wayes of God, and
ought couragiously to oppose all mockers and revilers of the
godly.
</p>

<p>
13. As at all times, so specially now when the Lord
is calling us all to an account; it becomes the Ministers of
<pb n="309"/><anchor id="Pg309"/>
Christ, with all diligence and faithfulnesse, to improve
their Ministerie to the utmost, to be instant in season and
out of season; yea, even singally to imploy their time in
private, in reading of, and meditating on Scripture, that
the word of God may dwell plentifullie in them.
</p>

<p>
14. That the providing the Armies with Ministers be preferred
to any congregation, and these who are appointed to
attend the same, and are deficient, be without delay severelie
censured according to the Act of the General Assembly;
And that all Ministers not only in publike, pray for
our Armies, specially these that are to incounter with the
bloody enemie within the land, but also continually bear
them up before the Lord, that their lives being reformed,
their hearts and hands may be strengthned, and their undertaking
at last blessed of GOD; with successe.
</p>

<p>
15. That beside all other scandals, silence or ambiguous
speaking in the publike cause, much more detracting
and disaffected speaches be seasonablie censured; and
to this effect, all honest hearted Brethren would firmlie unite
themselves in the Lord, the younger honouring the
elder, and the elder not despising the younger.
</p>

<p>
16. And finallie, both for the corruption of the Ministerie
and remedies thereof, we refer the brethren to the
Act of the Generall Assemblie at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi> 1596. revived
in the late Assemblie at <hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi> 1638. to bee found in
the printed Act concerning the same.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Generall Assembly Ordains the Enormities above specified
to be tryed and restrained, and that the Remedies thereof
for that purpose be seriously observed and practised:
Recommending especially to Presbyteries and Provinciall
Assemblies, that use be made of the same in visitation of
Kirks and tryall of Presbyteries.</hi>
</p>

</div>

<pb n="310"/><anchor id="Pg310"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Commission of the
Approbation of the proceedings of the
preceding Assembly.</hi></head>

<p>
The General Assembly having heard the report of the
Committee appointed to consider and examine the proceedings
of the Commissioners of the late General Assembly
holden at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi> in the yeer 1646. And after serious
consideration thereof, finding that the whole Acts, Proceedings,
and Conclusions of the saids Commissioners, contained
in the Register subscribed by Mr <hi rend='italic'>Andrew Ker</hi> their
Klerk, and by Mr <hi rend='italic'>Robert Ramsay</hi> Moderator to the said Committee,
do declare much Wisdom, Diligence, Vigilancie,
and commendable Zeal; And that the said Commissioners
have orderly and formally proceeded in every thing,
according to their Commission: Do therefore ratifie and approve
the said whole Acts, Proceedings, and Conclusions
of the Commissioners of the said Assembly.
</p>

</div>

</div>
<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>15. Junii 1646. Postmeridiem.</hi> Sess. 11.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act for joyning of the Presbyteries in</hi> Orkney
<hi rend='italic'>and</hi> Zetland <hi rend='italic'>to the Provincial of</hi>
Cathnes.</head>

<p>
The General Assembly, considering that the Presbyterie
of <hi rend='italic'>Kirkwall</hi> in <hi rend='italic'>Orkney</hi>
and the Presbyterie of <hi rend='italic'>Schalloway</hi> in
<hi rend='italic'>Zetland</hi> have never met in any Provincial Assembly, where
through great abuses and disordres are there committed,
Therefore the Assembly hereby joyns the said two Presbyteries
to the Provincial of <hi rend='italic'>Cathnes</hi>
and <hi rend='italic'>Suterland</hi>, And appoints
all the Ministers and Elders of the said Presbyteries
hereafter, to meet at the said Provincial Assembly, and
to have place to reason and vote therein as Members of
the said Provincial. And suchlike ordains the saids two
Presbyteries to be of subordinate Jurisdiction to the said
<pb n="311"/><anchor id="Pg311"/>
Provincial Assembly, Declaring hereby, that the said Provincial
shall consist of the Presbyteries of <hi rend='italic'>Cathnes, Sutherland,
Orknay</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>Zetland</hi> in all time coming. And appoints
them to meet onely once in the yeer, in respect of their great
distance and interjection of seas; And that the first meeting
be at <hi rend='italic'>Thurso</hi> in <hi rend='italic'>Cathnes</hi>
upon the third Tuesday of August next,
and thereafter as shall be appointed by the said Provinciall
Assembly.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>17. Junii 1646. Postmeridiem.</hi> Sess. 14.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act concerning Expectants Preaching
in Publike.</hi></head>

<p>
The General Assembly discharges any Person to preach
in publike under the name and notion of an Expectant
or under any other pretence whatsoever, except
such as shall be tryed and found qualified according to the
Acts of the General Assembly; Recommending to Presbyteries
and Provincials to take special notice thereof, and to
censure the Transgressors accordingly.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act for censuring the Complyers with the
publike Enemies of this Kirk and Kingdom.</hi></head>

<p>
The General Assembly taking to their serious consideration
the great and scandalous provocation and grievous
defection from the publike Cause, which some
have beene guiltie of, by complying with the Rebels the
publike Enemies of this Kirk and Kingdom: And judging
it a dutie incumbent to them to bring such notorious
Offenders to publike satisfaction, that the Wrath of God
may be averted, and the publike scandal removed; Do therefore
Require, Decern, and Ordain, that such as after
<pb n="312"/><anchor id="Pg312"/>
lawfull tryall shall be found to have been in actuall Rebellion
and to have carried charge with the Rebels, To have accepted
Commissions for raising Horse or Foot unto them,
To have been seducers of others to joyn in that Rebellion,
To be the Penners or contrivers of <hi rend='italic'>James Grahames</hi> Proclamation
for indicting a pretended Parliament, or of any other
his Proclamations or Declarations, To have beene prime
Instruments in causing publish the said Proclamations and
Declarations; That all and every one of such offenders shal
humbly acknowledge their offence upon their knees, first
before the Presbyterie, and thereafter before the Congregation
upon a Sabbath, in some place before the Pulpit;
And in the mean time that they be suspended from the Lords
Supper: And in case they do not satisfie in manner foresaid,
that they be processed with Excommunication. And likewise
Ordains; that such as shall be found to have procured
Protections from the Rebels, To have execute their orders,
To have invited them to their houses, To have given
them intelligence, To have drunk <hi rend='italic'>James Grahames</hi> health
or to be guilty of any other such grose degrees of complyance,
shall acknowledge their offences publikely before
the Congregation, and be suspended from the Communion,
and while they doe the same. And further Decernes
and Ordains, that all persons in any Ecclesiastick office
guilty of any degrees of complyance before mentioned, shall
be suspended from their office &amp; all exercise thereof, for such
time as the quality of the offence and condition of the offenders
shall be found to deserve; And the Assembly hereby
declares than Presbyteries have a latitude and liberty to
agreadge the censures above specified, according to the degrees
and circumstances of the offences; And gives in like
maner the same latitude and liberty to the Commissioners of
this Assembly for publike affairs, who have also power to
try and censure the offenders in manner above exprest,
and to take account of the diligence of Presbyteries thereintill.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="313"/><anchor id="Pg313"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act concerning</hi> James Grahams
<hi rend='italic'>Proclamation.</hi></head>

<p>
The General Assembly having considered a copie of a
Proclamation published by order of that excommunicat
Traitor <hi rend='italic'>James Graham</hi>, for indicting of a pretended
Parliament, and finding the same to be full of Blasphemies
against the solemn League and Covenant of the
three Kingdoms, and of vile aspersions of Treason, Rebellion,
and Sedition most falsly and impudently imputed
to the Estates, and most faithfull and loyall Subjects of this
Kingdome: Doe therfore declare, That such as have bin
prim Instruments of the publishing of that or the Proclamation
and Declaration, deserve the highest censures of
the Kirks, unlesse they make humble confession of their offence
publickely, in such manner as is prescribed by this
Assembly; And humbly Recommends to the Committee
of Estates to take some course for their exemplary civill punishment,
and that some publike note of ignominie be
put upon that Proclamation as their Honors shall think meet.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>18. Junii 1646. Antermeridiem.</hi> Sess. Ult.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act against loosing of Ships and Barks upon
the Lords Day.</hi></head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly understanding how much the
Lords day is profaned by Skippers and other Seafaring
men, Do therefore discharge and inhibite all Skippers and
Sailers to begin any voyage on the Lords day, or to loose
any Ships, Barks or Boats out of Harbery or Road upon
that day, And who shall do in the contrary hereof, shall
be censured as profaners of the Sabbath: Recommending
to Presbyteries and others whom it may concerne to see
both of the Acts of Assembly and Parliament made for censuring
and punishing profanation of the Lords day, to be put
in execution against them.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="314"/><anchor id="Pg314"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act anent Children sent without the Kingdom.</hi></head>

<p>
Whereas divers Children have been sent without the
Kingdom to be bred abrord, and have been or in time
coming may be exposed to the temptations of seducers, and
drawn away from the Trueth established and professed within
this Church to errour of Poperie, or other Sects and
Heresies: Therefore the Assembly Ordains, that the Parents
or Friends of Children and Minors, shall before they
send them without the Kingdom, first acquaint the Presbytery
where they reside, that they may have their Testimoniall
directed to the Presbytery or Classe within the Kingdom
of <hi rend='italic'>France</hi>, or <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>,
or <hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi>, and at the time of
these Childrens return from any of the saids Kingdoms,
to report ane Testimoniall from the Presbytery or Synode
where they lived without the Kingdom of their breeding
there (and to shew the same to the Presbytery within the
Kingdom who gave them a Testimoniall at their way going).
Likeas the Assembly Ordains all Presbyteries to try if any
Children have been sent to Popish Schooles or Colledges
Without the Kingdom; And if any be found, that their
names be given to the Presbytery or Commissioners of the
Assembly, that the same may be presented to the Honourable
Lords of Secret Councell, or Committee of Estates,
that their Lordships may be humbly desired by their authority
to recal them, that after return to this Kingdom course
may be taken according to the former Ordinances of Generall
Assemblies, for their breeding in the true Religion.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Overtures presented to the Assembly.</hi></head>

<p>
That correspondence be keeped among Presbyteries constantly
by letter without prejudice of personall correspondence
when need requires, whereby one Presbyterie may
<pb n="315"/><anchor id="Pg315"/>
understand what many are doing, and they may be mutually
assisting each to other.
</p>

<p>
II. That for the better breeding of young men to the
Ministerie who are not able to furnish themselves in charges
to attend in the Universities, that the Presbyteries where
they reside appoint some to direct their studies.
</p>

<p>
III. That it be recommended to all the Universities to
condiscend upon the best Overtures for the most profitable
teaching of Grammar and Phylosophy, and as they may
meet at the Commission of the Generall Assembly to make
the matter ripe for the next Assembly.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Assembly approves these Overtures, and recommends accordingly.</hi>
</p>

<p>
IV. That to the intent the knowlege of God in Christ
may be spread through the Highlands and Islands (for in
lack whereof the land hath smarted in the late troubles)
these courses be taken: 1. Let an order be procured,
that all Gentlemen who are able, at least send their eldest
sons to be bred in the Inland. 2. That a Ministerie be
planted amongst them, and for that effect that Ministers
and expectants who can speak the Irish language be sen to
imploy their talents in these parts, and that the Kirks there
be provided as other Kirks in this Kingdome. 3. That
Scots Schools be erected in all Parishes there, according
to the Act of Parliament, where conveniently they can be
had. 4. That Ministers and ruling Elders that have the
Irish language be appointed to visit these parts.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>The Assembly approves this Overture, and recommends
this purpose to further consideration, that more
Overtures may be prepared thereanent against the next
Assembly.</hi>
</quote>

<p>
V. That for keeping the Universities pure, and provoking
the Professors of Divinitie to great diligence, each Professor
in the Universities of this Church and Kingdom,
bring with him or send with the Commissioner who comes
to the General Assembly, ane perfit and well written copie
of his Dictates, to be revised by the General Assembly,
or such as they shall appoint for that work ilk year.
</p>

<pb n="316"/><anchor id="Pg316"/>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>The Assembly continues the determination of a constant and
perpetuall order herein untill the next Assembly, but
in the mean time desires the professors of Divinity to
present to the next Assembly their Dictates of Divinity
whereof the professors present are to give intimation to
the professors absent.</hi>
</quote>

<p>
VI. The great burdens Intrants undergoes when they
enter the Ministery, which holds many of them long at under,
would crave the Assemblies judgement and authority,
that Ministers Manses and Stipends may be all made free to
the Intrant.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>The Assembly refers and recommends to the Commissioners for
publike affairs to seek redresse in this matter from the
Honorable Houses of Parliament, and to consider of
some fitting Overtures to be presented to their Honours
for that effect.</hi>
</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Renovation of the Commission for the publike
affairs of the Kirk.</hi></head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly taking to their consideration that
in respect the great work of Uniformity in Religion in
all his Majesties Dominions is not yet perfited, (though
by the Lords blessing there is a good progresse made in the
same) there is a necessity of renewing the Commissions
granted formerly for prosecuting and perfiting that great
work, doe therefore renew the power and Commission
granted for the publike affairs of the Kirk by the Generall
Assemblies held in <hi rend='italic'>S. Andrews</hi> in
the year 1642. and in <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>
1643. 1644. and 1645. unto the persons following,
<hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi> Masters <hi rend='italic'>Alexander
Henderson, Robert Douglas, Willliam
Colvil, William Bennet, George Gillespie, John Oswald,
John Adamson, William Dalgleish, David Calderwood, James
Fleeming, Robert Ker, John Dalyell, James Wright,
<pb n="317"/><anchor id="Pg317"/>
John Knox, Adam Penman, Robert Lightoun, Alexander Dickeson,
Patrick Fleeming, John Hay, Richard Dickeson, Thomas
Vasse, David Drummund, Alexander Somervill, Robert Eliot,
Robert Blair, James Bruce, Robert Traile, Samuel Rutherfurd,
Alexander Colvall, Walter Greg, Alexander Balfour, George
Thomson, John Mencreiff, John Smith, Patrick Gillespie,
John Duncan, James Sibbald, Alexander Casse, John Hume,
Alexander Kinneir, Walter Swintoun, Robert Knox,
William Penan, James Guthrie, Thomas Donaldson, William
Jameton, Thomas Wilkie, John Knox, Robert Murray, John
Freebairn, Robert Wright, David Auchterlonie, William Maior,
Samuel Justein, John Leirmont, Andrew Lauder, James Irving,
Alexander Turnbull, James Bonar, William Adair, John Neve,
Patrik Colvil, Matthew Birsbane, John Hamiltoun, Allan
Ferguson, Robert Ramsay, Geo. Young, David Dickson, Robert
Bailie, James Nasmith, John Lindsay, John Weir, Evan
Cameron, James Affleck, John Robison, Andrew Eliot, Silvester
Lambie, Lawrence Skinner, William Rate, David Campbel,
Andrew Cant, William Douglas, David Lindsay, Gilbert Anderson,
Alexander Garrioch, William Jaffray, Thomas Caw, William
Campbell, Walte Stewart</hi> Ministers; And <hi rend='italic'>Archibald</hi>
Marquesse of Argle, <hi rend='italic'>John</hi> Eearle of Crawfurd-Lindsay,
<hi rend='italic'>William</hi> Earle Marshall, <hi rend='italic'>William</hi>
Earle of Glencairn, <hi rend='italic'>John</hi> Earle of Cassils,
<hi rend='italic'>Charles</hi> Earle of Dumfermling, <hi rend='italic'>James</hi>
Earle of Tullibardine, <hi rend='italic'>Francis</hi> Earle of Bacleugh,
<hi rend='italic'>John</hi> Earle of Lauderdale, <hi rend='italic'>William</hi>
Earle of Lothian, <hi rend='italic'>William</hi> Earle of Lanerk,
<hi rend='italic'>Archibald</hi> Lord Angus, <hi rend='italic'>John</hi> Lord Balmerino,
<hi rend='italic'>Robert</hi> Lord Burleigh, <hi rend='italic'>John</hi>
Master of Yesteir, Sir <hi rend='italic'>Patrick Hepburn</hi> of Waughtoun,
Sir <hi rend='italic'>John Hope</hi> of Craighall,
Sir <hi rend='italic'>Archibald Johnston</hi> of Wariston,
Sir <hi rend='italic'>David Hume</hi> of Wedderburn,
Sir <hi rend='italic'>Robert Innes</hi> of that ilk, Sir <hi rend='italic'>William
Baily</hi> of Lemington, Sir <hi rend='italic'>John Muncreiffe</hi> of that ilk,
<hi rend='italic'>James Macdougal</hi> of Garthland,
<hi rend='italic'>Patrick Cockburn</hi> of Clarkington,
Sir <hi rend='italic'>Hugh Campbel</hi> of Cesnock, Sir
<hi rend='italic'>William Cunningham</hi> of Cunninghamhead,
<hi rend='italic'>John Hume</hi> of Blackader, Sir <hi rend='italic'>James Dundas</hi>
of Arniston, <hi rend='italic'>Alex Forbes</hi> Tutor of Pitsligo,
<hi rend='italic'>Mr Geo. Winrham</hi> of Libberton, <hi rend='italic'>David Weemes</hi>
of Fingask, Mr <hi rend='italic'>Francis Hay</hi> of Balhousie,
<hi rend='italic'>Alex. Brodie</hi> of that ilk,
<hi rend='italic'>Mr Alex. Colvill</hi> of Blair,
<hi rend='italic'>Geo. Dundas</hi> of Dudiston,
<hi rend='italic'>William Moor</hi> of Glanderston,
<pb n="318"/><anchor id="Pg318"/>
Sir <hi rend='italic'>James Nicolson</hi> of Colbrandspaith,
<hi rend='italic'>John Edgar</hi> of Wedderlie,
<hi rend='italic'>William Hume</hi> of Lenthill,
<hi rend='italic'>James Ruchhead, Laurence Henderson</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>James
Stuart</hi> Bailes of Edinburgh, <hi rend='italic'>George Porterfield</hi>
Provest of Glasgow, <hi rend='italic'>Wil. Hume</hi> there,
<hi rend='italic'>Ro. Arnot</hi> Provest of Perth, <hi rend='italic'>John Semple</hi>
Provest of Dumbarton, <hi rend='italic'>John
Kennedie</hi> Provest of Air, <hi rend='italic'>Mr David Weems, Geo. Gardine,
John Johnstoun, Tho. Paterson, Tho. White, John Sleigh</hi> Elders.
Giving unto them full power and Commission To
do all and every thing for prosecuting, advancing, perfecting,
and bringing the said work of Uniformity in Religion
in all His Majesties Dominions to a happy conclusion, conform
to the former Commissions granted by preceding Assemblies
thereanent. And to that effect appoints them, or
any seventeen of them, whereof thirteen shall be Ministers,
To meet at Edinburgh the 19 of this Moneth, and
thereafter upon the second Wednesdais of August, November,
Februar and May next to come, and upon any other
day and in any other place they shall think meet. And further,
renews to the persons before named, the power contained
in the Act of the said Assembly 1643. Intituled, <hi rend='italic'>A reference
to the Commission anent the persons designed to repair to the
Kingdom of</hi> England; As also the power contained in two several
Acts of the said Assembly 1644. Sess. 6 made <hi rend='italic'>against secret
disaffecters of the Covenant</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>for sending Ministers to the
Armie</hi>, with full power to them to treat and determine in the matter
aforesaid, and in all others matters referred unto them by this
Assembly, as fully and freely as if the same were here particularly
expressed, and with as ample power as any Commission
of former General Assemblies hath had, or been in use of before;
They being alwayes for their whole proceedings
comptable to, and censurable by the next Generall Assembly.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Renovation of the Commission for prosecuting
the Treaty for Uniformity in</hi> England.</head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly, Taking to their consideration
that the Treatie of Uniformity in Religion in all His
<pb n="319"/><anchor id="Pg319"/>
Majesties Dominions is not yet perfected, Therefore renews
the power &amp; Commission granted by preceding Assemblies
for prosecuting that Treatie, unto these persons after
named, <hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi> Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Alexander Henderson</hi>,
Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Robert Douglas</hi>,
Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Samuel Rutherfurd</hi>, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Robert Bailie</hi>,
Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Geo. Gillespie</hi>
Ministers; And <hi rend='italic'>John</hi> Earle of Lauderdale,
<hi rend='italic'>John</hi> Lord Balmerino,
and Sir <hi rend='italic'>Archibald Johnston</hi> of Wariston Elders;
Authorising them with full power to prosecute the said Treatie
of Uniformity with the Honourable Houses of the Parliament
of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, and the Reverend Assembly of Divines
there, or any Committees appointed by them: And to do
all and every thing which may advance, perfect and bring
that Treatie to an happy conclusion, conform to the former
Commissions given thereanent.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>The Assemblies Answer
To
The Kings Maiestie.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>May it please your Majestie,</hi>
</p>

<p>
Having received your Majesties Letter with thankfulnesse,
we thought it our dutie to send some of our
number to wait upon your Majestie and present our humble
desires more particularly then at this time could be expressed
by writ; And we are confident your Majestie will interprete
our freedom and plain dealing by them, to be a reall testimonie
of our unfained affection, who have constantly laboured
to approve our selves in all fidelity to our Lord and
Master Jesus Christ, and in all loyaltie to your Majestie;
And are resolved to walk still after the same rule in our severall
stations and vocations, continuing our Prayers for you,
that God may multiply all sorts of Mercies upon your Royall
Person and Posterity, and more and more incline your
heart to the speedie following of the Counsels of Trueth
and Peace and grant unto your Majestie along and happy
<pb n="320"/><anchor id="Pg320"/>
Reign, that we may live under you a peaceable and quiet
life, in all godlinesse and honesty.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh, 18. Junii 1646.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Subscribed in name of the Nationall
Assembly of the Kirk of</hi> Scotland
<hi rend='italic'>by the Moderator.</hi>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>The Assemblies Letter to the Right Honorable
the Lords and Commons in the
Parliament of</hi> England <hi rend='italic'>Assembled
at</hi> Westminster.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Right Honourable,</hi>
</p>

<p>
The report of the great things which the Lord hath done
for your Honours, hath gone forth into many Lands,
and it becometh us least of any either to smother or extenuate
the same; We desire to be enlarged in the admiration
of the Power &amp; Mercie of God the Author, &amp; to diminish
nothing of that praise that is due unto you as Instruments.
When the Lord set your Honours upon the Bench of
Judgment, both the Kirk and Common wealth of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>
were afflicted with intestine and bosome evills, the cure
whereof could not but be very difficult; because they were
not only many, but for the most part Universall and deeply
rooted, sheltred under the shadow of Custome and Law,
and supported with all the wisdom and strength of the Malignant
and Prelatical partie; who rather chose to involve
the Land in an unnatural and bloody Warre, then to fail
of their ambitious and treacherous designes, against Religion,
the priviledges of Parliament, and the Lawes and
Liberties of the Kingdom: Neither hath that miserable crew
been wanting to their owne ends but for many years together
hath desperatly pursued their resolutions in Arms; And
was likely to have prevailed, if the Lord had not put himself
<pb n="321"/><anchor id="Pg321"/>
in the breach, and furnished you with much Patience,
Wisdom, Courage, and Constancy, in the midst of many
difficulties and distresses; and at last with so glorious and
triumphing a successe, that the Enemy hath fallen every
where before you, and there is none left to appear against
you. These things as they be the matter of our refreshment
and of your glory, so doe they lay a strong obligation upon
your Honours to walke humbly with your God, and to
improve the power he hath put into your hands for the advancement
of the Kingdom of his Son, and bringing
forth of the head-Stone of his House. The slow progresse
of the work of God hath alwaies been the matter of our
sorrow, which is now increased by the multiplication of the
spirits of errour and delusion, that drowne many souls into
perdition, and so strengthen themselves that they shall afterward
be laboured against, with more pains then successe,
if a speedy and effectuall remedie be not provided. And
therefore as the servants of the living God, who not onely
send up our supplications daily for you, but have hazarded
our selves in your defence, We do earnestly beseech your
Honors in the bowels of Jesus Christ, to give unto him
the glory that is due unto his Name, by a timous establishing
all his Ordinances in the full integritie and power
thereof, according to the League and Covenant. As long
as the Assembly of Divines was in debate, &amp; an enemy in the
fields, we conceived that these might be probable grounds
of delay, which being now removed out of the way, we
do promise to our selves from your Wisdom, Faithfulnesse,
and Zeale, the perfiting of that which was the main
ground of our engagement, and a chief matter of consolation
unto us in all our sad and heavy sufferings, from the
hand of a most cruell Enemy. We know that there is a
generation of men who retard the work of Uniformity, and
foment jealousies betwixt the Nations, studying if it were
possible, to break our bands asunder; But we trust, that
he that sits in the Heaven will Laugh, and that the Lord
shall have them in derision, that he shall speak to them in
his wrath and vex them in his sore displeasure, and notwithstanding
of all that they can do, set his King upon his holy
<pb n="322"/><anchor id="Pg322"/>
hill of Sion, and make these Nations happy in the sweet
fruits of Unity in Truth and Peace. The searcher of hearts
knows that we desire to hold fast the band of our Covenant,
as sacred and inviolable; being perswaded that the breach of
so solemne a tye could not but hasten down upon our heads a
curse and vengeance from the righteous Judge of the world,
and involve these Kingdoms in sader calamities then they
have yet seen, And we abhor to entertain any other thought
of you: Nay we are confident that your Honours will seriously
indeavour the prosecution of all these ends designed in
the Covenant, and the bringing these Nations unto the
neerest conjunction both in judgement and affection, especially
in these things that concern Religion, which with
out all controversie, is the readiest and surest way of attaining
and securing the Peace and Prosperity of both Kingdoms.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh 18 Junii 1646.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Subscribed in name of the Generall
Assembly by the Moderator.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>The Assemblies Letter to the Right Honorable
the Lord</hi> Major Aldermen, <hi rend='italic'>and</hi> Common-Councel
<hi rend='italic'>of the City of</hi> London.</head>

<p>
Your late and seasonable testimony given to the Truth
of the Gospel, and your affection to the Peace of the
Kingdoms, manifested in your humble Remonstrance and
Petition to the Honorable Houses of Parliament, hath so
revived the remembrance of your former Faith and Zeal,
and proclaimed you the worthy seed of so noble ancestors in
that famous City, As we cannot but acknowledge with all
thankfulnesse the grace of God bestowed on you, and stirre
you up to take notice, how since you were precious in the
Lords sight, you have been ever Honurable, The Lord
hath loved you, given men for you, and people for your
life: What an honour was it in the dayes of old, when the
fire of the Lord was in <hi rend='italic'>Zion</hi>, and
his furnace in your <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>
(even in Queen <hi rend='italic'>Maries</hi> dayes) that there were found in
<pb n="323"/><anchor id="Pg323"/>
you men that loved not their lives unto the death? What
a glory in after time, when Satan had his Throne and
Antichrist his Seat in the midst of you, that there were
still found not a few that kept their Garments clean?
But the greatest praise of the good hand of God upon
you hath been in this, That amidst the many Mists of
Errour and Heresie which have risen from the bottomlesse
pit, to bespot the face and darken the glory of the Church,
(while the Bride is a making ready for the Lamb) you have
held the Trueth, and most piously endeavoured the setling
of Christ upon his Throne. We need not remember how
zealous you have been in the Cause of God, nor how you
have laid out your selves and estates in the maintenance thereof,
nor how many acknowledgements of the same you
have had from the Honourable Houses, nor how precious
a remembrance will be had of you in after ages for your selling
of all to buy the Pearl of price: We only at this time do
admire, and in the inward of our hearts do blesse the Lord
for your right and deep apprehensions of the great and important
matters of Christ in his Royall Crown; and of the
Kingdoms in their Union, while the Lord maketh offers to
bring our Ship (so much afflicted and tolled with tempest)
to the safe Harbour of Trueth and Peace. Right memorable
is your Zeal against Sects and Sectaries; your care of
Reformation, according to the word of God, and the example
of the best Reformed Churches; your earnest endeavours
and noble adventures, for preserving of the rights and
priviledges of Parliament, and Liberties of the Kingdomes,
Together with his Majesties just power and greatnesse; and
your high profession, that it is not in the power of any humane
authority to discharge or absolve you from adhearing
unto that our (so solemnly sworn) League and Covenant,
or to enforce upon you any sense contrary to the letter of the
same, Besides your other good services done unto the Lord
and to us, in the strengthening of the hands of the reverend
Assembly of Divines, and of our Commissioners in their
asserting of the government of Christ, (which the more it
be tried will be ever found the more precious Truth), and
vindicating of the same from the usurpation of man, and
<pb n="324"/><anchor id="Pg324"/>
contempt of the wicked. These all as they are so many testimonies
of your Pietie, Loyaltie, and undaunted resolution
to stand for Christ; So are they and shall ever be so many
obligations upon us your Brethren, to esteem highly of
you in the Lord, to bear you on our brests before him night
and day, and to contribute our best endeavours, and to improve
all opportunities for your encouragement. And now
we beseech you in the Lord, Honorable and welbeloved,
go on in this your strength, and in the power of his might
who hath honoured you to be faithful, stand fast in that liberty
wherewith Christ hath made you free; And in the
pursuance of this truth, we are confident, as you have, so
you will never cease to study the Peace and neerer conjunction
of the Kingdoms, knowing that a threefold cord is not
easily broken. Now the Lord Jesus Christ himself, and
God even our Father, which hath loved and honoured you,
and given you everlasting consolation, &amp; good help through
grace, comfort your hearts, and stablish you in every good
word and work.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh 18 Iunii
1646.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Subscribed in name of the
General Assembly by
the Moderator.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>The Assemblies Letter to the right Reverend
the Assembly of Divines in the Kirk of</hi> England
<hi rend='italic'>assembled at</hi> Westminster.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Much Honoured and right Reverend.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Amongst other fruits of this our precious liberty, after
such dissipation by Sword and Pestilence, to meet again,
we account it not the least, to have the opportunity of making
a publike Declaration of our earnest affection to all our
brethren of that Nation, and especially your selves of the
Reverend Assembly at <hi rend='italic'>Westminster</hi>. When we were lately
in a very low condition, we may say that our own sufferings
<pb n="325"/><anchor id="Pg325"/>
and fears, although imbittered with the sense of the Lords
displeasure against our luke warmneese and unfaithfulnesse;
yet they did not so take up our heart, but that room was
left to congratulate with the Lords people there in all their
successes, and to condole with them in all their dangers;
And if at any time any here seemed to be more jealous then
godly jealousie would allow, we know not how it can be
imputed to any thing else, but to the vehemencie of ardent
affection, and impatient desire to have our brethren there
and us joyned neerer to Christ, and neerer to one another in
all his Ordinances; and especially is Presbyterial Government,
so well warranted by the Word, and approven by
experience of our own and other reformed Churches;
Wherein your long and unwearied endeavours have been
blessed with a large increase, which yet hath proved still
a seed unto a further and more glorious expected harvest.
There could not be wished by mortal men a fairer opportunity
then is cast in your laps, being invited and charged by
so high an authority, to give so free and publike a testimony
to those truths, which formerly many of the Lords precious
ones by tongue and pen, by tears and blood have more
privately asserted; The smallest of Christs truths (if it be
lawful to call any of them small) is of greater moment,
then all the other businesses that ever have been debated
since the beginning of the world to this day; But the highest
of honours and heaviest of burdens is put upon you, to
declare out of the sacred records of Divine Truth, what is
the prerogitive of the Crown and extent of the Scepter of
Jesus Christ, what bounds are to be set between Him ruling
in his House, and powers established by God on Earth,
how and by whom his House is to be governed, and by
what wayes a restraint is to be put on those who would pervert
his Truth, and subvert the faith of many. No doubt
mountains of oppositions arise, and gulfs of difficulties
open up themselves in this your way; But you have found
it is God that girdeth you with strength and maketh your
way perfect and plain before you, who hath delivered, and
doth deliver, and will yet deliver. We need not put you
in minde that as there lyeth at this time a strict eye on all, so
<pb n="326"/><anchor id="Pg326"/>
in a special manner both you and we are ingaged to interpose
our selves between God and these Kingdomes; between
the two Nations, between the King and the People, for
averting of deserved wrath, for continuing and increasing
of a well grounded Union, for procuring as far as in us
lyeth a right settling of Religion and Church-Government;
That when we shall sleep with our fathers the Posterity
here and abroad may be reaping the fruits of our labours.
</p>

<p>
We are fully assured of your constant and sedulous promoving
of this blessed Work, and of the Lords assisting and
carrying you on therein: And are confident that your late
experience and present sense of the great danger and fearfull
confusion flowing from the rife and grouth of Sects and
Sectaries not suppressed, hath stirred up in your hearts most
fervent desires, and careful endeavours for remedying the
same, wherein we exhort you to continue and abound;
knowing that your labours shall not be in vain in the Lord,
to whose rich grace we commend you, and the work in
your hands.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh 18 Juny 1646.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Subscribed in name of the
General Assembly by
the Moderator.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Recommendation to Presbyteries and
Provincial Assemblies.</hi></head>

<p>
1. The Assembly recommends to the several Presbyteries
and Provincial Assemblies, to consider the interests
of particular congregations, in the calling,
and admission of Ministers, with all these questions that usually
fall out upon that occasion; And to report their opinions
to the next Assembly, with some fit Overtures for preventing
all contests in that matter.
</p>

<p>
2. The Assembly recommends to Presbyteries and Provincial
Assemblies to consider all the matters referred by
<pb n="327"/><anchor id="Pg3327"/>
preceding Assemblies to the consideration of Presbyteries,
And to report their opinions therein to the next Assembly.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act for a publike Fast before the next
Assembly.</hi></head>

<p>
The Assembly having considered an Act of the Assembly
1644. <hi rend='italic'>Sess. Ult.</hi> enjoyning a publike Fast to be keeped
in all the Kirks of the City where the General Assembly
holds upon the first day of the meeting of the Assembly;
And finding some inconveniencies therein, Therefore at
this time until the matter be further considered, Appoints
a publike Fast and Humiliation for the Lords blessing to the
meeting of the next Assembly, to be universally observed
in all the congregations of this Kirk upon the Sabbath next
except one preceeding the said next Assembly; The exercises
for the members of the Assembly at their first meeting,
being still observed according to the ancient and laudable
practise of this Kirk, This appointment not withstanding.
</p>

</div>

<div>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Assembly appoints the meeting of the next General
Assembly to be at Edinburgh upon the first Wednesday
of August 1647.</hi>
</p>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<pb n="328"/><anchor id="Pg328"/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>The Generall Assembly, At <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi> 4. August. 1647.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>August. 16. 1647 Postmeridiem. Sess. 2.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act allowing the half of the Ministers in the
Presbyterie of</hi> Zetland <hi rend='italic'>only, with their Ruling
Elders, to keep the Provincial Assembly.</hi></head>

<p>
The General Assembly, Understanding that the
whole Members of the Presbyterie of <hi rend='italic'>Zetland</hi>,
joyned to the Provincial of <hi rend='italic'>Caithnes</hi>
and <hi rend='italic'>Sutherland</hi>
upon weighty considerations by the preceeding
Assembly, cannot be by present at the
meetings of that Provincial, without great prejudice to the
particular Congregations within that Presbyterie, and
many other inconveniences; That Isle being of great distance
from Land, and the passage from and to the same
being uncertain and dangerous: Doe therefore Declare and
Ordaine, That the whole Ministers and Elders of the Presbyterie
of <hi rend='italic'>Zetland</hi> shall not be tyed hereafter to come to
meetings of their said Provincial; But that the half of
the number of the Ministers with their Ruling Elders,
<pb n="329"/><anchor id="Pg329"/>
shall be onely oblieged to keep the meetings of the said Provincial
Assembly in time coming.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>20. August 1647. Antemeridiem.</hi> Sess. 15.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>A Declaration, and Brotherly Exhortation
of the General Assembly of the
Church of</hi> Scotland, <hi rend='italic'>to their
Brethren of</hi> England.</head>

<p>
The conscience of our dutie to God obliging us to give a
testimony to his Truth, and to the Kingdom of his
Sonne Jesus Christ, now so much resisted and opposed by
many, and so little owned by others: The laudable custome
and example of correspondency between Neighbouring
Churches, exhorting, encouraging, and (in case of
publike scandal) admonishing in love one another, as
well as single Brethren ought to admonish one another in
love, in the case of private offence: Our neerer relation and
more special affection to our Brethren of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, making
us to sympathize with them in their danger and affliction as
our own, both Kingdomes being united as one entire Body
in one Covenant, for pursuing the common cause and ends
therein expressed: Yea, common reason and experience it
self teaching us that we have no cause to conceive our Religion,
the liberties of this Church, or our selves to be in a
condition of safety, when ever the enemies of our Religion
and Liberties are growing to a prevalency in the Neighbour
Kingdom. Any one of these considerations, much more
all of them together, cry aloud upon us to break our silence
in this present Juncture of Affaires; yet we hope to expresse
our selves both concerning the present Dangers and present
Duties, as in a conscionable and Brotherly freedome, so in,
a fair and in offensive way; for we have no pleasure nor purpose
<pb n="330"/><anchor id="Pg330"/>
to provoke any Person or Party whatsoever, not to encrease,
but to endeavour the allaying and composing of the
present unhappy differences. If any shall offend at our discharging
our conscience &amp; doing our duty, yet we shall rather
chose to take our hazard of that, then of displeasing God
by neglect of duty. But we hope better things, then to be
mis-understood, or mis-interpreted by such as desire a candide
interpretation of their own actions or expressions.
</p>

<p>
First of all, whatsoever the present discouragements,
difficulties or dangers are, or whatsoever for the future they
may be, we cannot but commemorate to the glory of God,
and we doubt not it shall be remembred to his glory in the
Church throughout all ages, How great a salvation his
Mighty Hand and Outstretched Arme hath wrought for
these three Kingdomes; How he stirred up the Spirits of his
People in this Kingdome ten yeares agoe, to begin to shake
off the Yoke of Prelatical tyrannie, and of Popish Ceremonies
obtruded upon us, contrary to the Lawes of God and
Men; How he led us on from so small beginnings, &amp; from
one degree to another, till we were United in a National
Covenant; How he gave us a Banner to be displayed for the
Truth, and so blessed us in the prosecution of that Covenant,
that the Kings Majesty was graciously pleased upon
the humble Petitions of his Loyal Subjects in this Nation,
to indict a General Assembly and Parliament for healing the
grievances of Church and State respectively, As likewise to
grant his Royal consent for Confirming and Ratifying by
Acts of Parliament our National Covenant, &amp; the Government
and Liberties of this Church. After which the new
Troubles raised against us by the malice and treachery of our
enemies, did occasion the first expedition of this Nation into
<hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, (upon which followed the calling of the Parliament
there, and the large Treaty) and in the issue, the return
of that Army was with an Olive branch of Peace,
and not without the beginnings of a Reformation in <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>:
In which work while the Parliament was interrupted and opposed,
and a bloody War begun with great successe on that
side which opposed the Parliament and the begun Reformation,
from whence also did accrew great advantage to the
<pb n="331"/><anchor id="Pg331"/>
Popish Party (whereof the Cessation of Arms concluded in
<hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi> may be in stead of many testimonies;) Commissioners
were sent hither from both Houses, earnestly inviting and
perswading to a nearer Union of the Kingdomes, and desiring
Assistance from this Nation to their Brethren in that
their great distresse; And this by the good Hand of God
produced the solemne League and Covenant of the three
Kingdomes, to the terrour of the Popish and Prelatical party
our common Enemies, and to the great comfort of such as
were wishing and waiting for the Reformation of Religion;
and the recovery of just Liberties. And although for
the conjunction of the Kingdomes in Covenant, and
Armes (being a speciall means tending to the extirpation
of Popery) and strengthening the true Reformed Religion;
this Kingdome hath been invaded and infested by the bloody
<hi rend='italic'>Irish</hi> Rebels aided and strengthened by some degenerate
and perfidious Countrey-men of our owne: Although also
in <hi rend='italic'>England</hi> there were not wanting incendiaries, who hating
and envying nothing more then the Union of the Kingdomes
in such a Covenant, were very vigilant to catch, and
active to improve all occasions of making divisive motions,
and creating Nationall Differences; Yet God hath been
graciously pleased to break our Enemies strength at Home
when it was greatest, and to guide us through these Jealousies
and Differences fomented by disaffected Persons between
the Kingdomes; So that in stead of a splitting upon
these Rocks (the thing hoped for by our Enemies) there
was a peaceable and friendly parting: Since which time
God hath further blessed our Army at Home, to the
expelling of the Enemie out of our own Borders. Nor
can we passe in silence the happy progresse which hath been
made in the Reformation of the Church of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>; He
that hath brought the Children to the birth, can also give
strength to come forth; And hee whose hand did cast out
Prelacie and the Book of Common Prayer (although
strongly rooted in standing Lawes;) and who enclined
the Parliament of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi> to owne no other Church Government
but the Presbyterial, (Though it bee not yet
fully settled according to the Word of God, and the example
<pb n="332"/><anchor id="Pg332"/>
of the best Reformed Churches) can as easily encline
when hee thinks good both the King and them, and
the body of that Kingdome to a thorow and perfect Reformation.
He that made the Assemblies and Parliaments of
both Kingdomes to agree upon one directory for the Publike
Worship of God, can also when he will make an agreement
in the other Parts of Uniformitie, Confession
of Faith, form of Church Government, and Catechisme;
In all which there hath beene also a good progresse made in
the Reverend and Learned Assemblie of Divines through
the good hand of God so long upon them.
</p>

<p>
Having now seen so much of God both in the beginning
and progresse of this his great Work, And his Hand having
done so wondrous things for his People in their greatest
extremities of danger, and having discovered and defeated
the plots of Enemies, making them fall even by their own
Counsels; These things wee resolve to keep still fixed in
our hearts, and as memorials before our eyes, that remembring
the Works of the Lord, and the Years of the Right
Hand of the most High, wee may neither want matter of
Praies and thanksgivings, nor experience to breed hope.
Although the building of the House of the Lord in <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>
be not yet, after so long expectation, finished, and now
also the work ceaseth, Yet wee doe from our hearts blesse
the Lord for the laying of the Foundation, and for so much
progresse as hath been made in the Work; Having still confidence
in the Almighty, to whom nothing is impossible or
too hard, that every Mountaine which doeth or shall stand
in the way shall become a plaine, and that the Head-stone
shall bee brought forth with shoutings of Joy, <hi rend='italic'>Grace, Grace
unto it.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Neverthelesse, we are also very sensible of the great and
imminent dangers into which this Common Cause of Religion
is now brought by the growing and spreading of most
dangerous errours in <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, to the obstructing &amp; hindering
of the begun Reformation, as namely (beside many others)
Socinianisme, Arminianisme, Anabaptisme, Antinomianisme,
Brownisme, Erastianisme, Independency, and that which
is called (by abuse of the word) Liberty of Conscience, being
<pb n="333"/><anchor id="Pg333"/>
indeed Liberty of Errour, Scandall, Schisme, heresie,
dishonouring God, opposing the Truth, hindering Reformation;
and seducing others; Whereunto we adde those
Nullifidians, or men of no Religion, commonly called
Seekers: Yea, wee cannot but look upon the Dangers of
the true Reformed Religion in this Island, as greater now
then before; Not onely for that those very principles &amp; fundamentals
of Faith which under Prelacy, yea, under Popery
it self, were generally received as uncontroverted, are
now by the Scepticisme of many Sectaries of this time either
oppugned, or called in question; But also, because in
stead of carrying on the Reformation towards perfection,
that which hath beene already built is in part cast down,
and in danger to be wholly overthrowne through the endeavours
of Sectaries to comply with many of the Prelaticall
and Malignant, and even the Popish party; and their joyning
hand in hand, and casting in their lots, and interweaving
their interests together in way of Combination, against
the Covenant and Presbyteriall Government; Yea,
the unclean spirit which was cast out, is about to enter againe
with seven other spirits worse then himselfe, and so
the latter end like to be worse then the beginning.
</p>

<p>
We are extremely sorry that we have cause to aggravate
these evils from the crying sin of breach of Covenant, Whereof
if we should hold our peace, yet according to the
Word of the Lord; other Nations will say, and many
among them do say, Wherefore hath the Lord done thus
unto this People? and what meaneth the heat of this great
anger? And they answer one another, <hi rend='italic'>Because they have forsaken
the Covenant of the Lord their God.</hi> We would not be
understood as if we meant either to Justifie this Nation, or
to charge such a sin upon all in that Nation. We know the
Covenant hath been in divers particulars broken by many in
both Kingdomes, the Lord pardon it, and accept a Sacrifice;
And wee doe not doubt but there are many seven
thousands in <hi rend='italic'>England</hi> who have not onely kept themselves
unspotted, and retained their integrity in that businesse,
but doe also mourne and groane before the Lord for that sin
of others. Yet we should but deny our own sence and betray
<pb n="334"/><anchor id="Pg334"/>
the Truth, if we should not resent so great a sinne and
danger, as is the breach of a solemne Covenant, sworn
with hands lifted up to the most High God: Which breach
however varnished over with some colourable and handsome
pretexts, one whereof is the Liberty &amp; Common Right of
the free People of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>,
as once <hi rend='italic'>Saul</hi> brake a Covenant
with the Gibeonites, <hi rend='italic'>In his Zeal to
the Children of Israel and Iudah</hi>:
Yet God could not then, and cannot now be mocked;
Yea, it is too apparent and undeniable, that among those
who did take the Covenant of the three Kingdomes, as
there are many who have given themselves to a detestable
indifferency or neutralitie, so there is a Generation
which hath made defection to the contrary Part; Persecuting
as far as they could that true Reformed Religion, in
Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government, which
by the Covenant they ought to preserve against the common
Enemies; hindering and resisting the Reformation and
Uniformity, which by the Covenant ought to bee endeavoured;
preserving and tolerating those cursed things which
by the Covenant ought to be extirpate, especially Heresie and Schisme,
encroaching upon, yea offering violence unto the
Rights, Priviledges, and Authority of Magistracie, Protecting
and assisting such as by the Covenant ought to have
been brought to condigne triall and punishment, and persecuting
those who by the Covenant ought to be assisted and
defended; Endeavouring also a breach in stead of a firme
Peace and Union between the Kingdomes: So that there is
not any one Article of the Solemne League and Covenant
which hath not been sinfully and dangerously violated before
God, Angels, and Men. Now if a Covenant for
the preservation and Reformation of Religion, the Maintenance
and Defence of Liberties was justly thought a
<hi rend='italic'>fit and excellent mean</hi>, not
only to <hi rend='italic'>strengthen and fortifie</hi> the
Kingdomes against the common Enemie of the true Reformed
Religion, publike Peace and Prosperity; But also
<hi rend='italic'>to acquire the favour of Almightie GOD towards the three
Kingdomes, of England, Scotland, and Ireland,</hi> as is expressed
in the Ordinance of the Lords and Commons
for the taking of the Covenant, dated <hi rend='italic'>February 2. 1643</hi>.
</p>

<pb n="335"/><anchor id="Pg335"/>

<p>
Surely then the Authors and chief Instruments of the breach
of that Covenant, are to be looked upon as those who
strengthen the hands of the common Enemie, and provoke
the wrath of Almighty God against these Kingdomes. Yea,
if this Covenant was the <hi rend='italic'>Soveraigne
and onely meanes of the recovery</hi>
of these embroiled bleeding Kingdoms, as is expressed in
the exhortation of the Assembly of Divines to the taking of
the Covenant, approved and ordered to be Printed by the
House of Commons; The despising, refusing, and casting
aside of that remedy, must needs render the disease much
more desperate. And if by the Declaration of both Kingdomes
joined in Arms, <hi rend='italic'>Anno 1643.</hi> such as would not take
the Covenant, were declared <hi rend='italic'>to be publike Enemies to their
Religion and Countrey, and that they are to be censured and punished as
professed Adversaries and Malignants.</hi> Who seeth not now a
strange falling away from these first Principles and Professions,
among these who either magnifie and cry up, or at least
connive at and comply with such as have not taken the Covenant,
yea, are known Enemies to it, and cry down such
as are most zealous for it?
</p>

<p>
In this case, while in the Neighbour Kingdom, the staves
of Beauty and Bands, Covenant &amp; Brother-hood are broken
by many, the home of Malignants and Sectaries exalted,
the best affected born down, Reformation ebbing, Heresie
and Schisme flowing; It can hardly be marvelled at by any
Person of prudence and discretion, if we be full of such
feares and apprehensions as use to be in those who dwell near
a House set on fire, or a Family infected, especially being
taught by the sad experience of these Prelatical times, how
easily a Gangrene in the one half of this Island may spread
through the whole; Knowing also the inveterate and insatiable
malice of the Enemies of this Cause and Covenant
against this Church and Kingdome; which we cannot be
ignorant of, unlesse we would shut our eyes &amp; stop our ears.
</p>

<p>
Our present purpose leadeth us to touch somewhat of the
proceedings of the Army in <hi rend='italic'>England</hi> this Summer, so far as
Religion is therein concerned; As we are confident, divers
have gone a long with them in the simplicity of their
hearts, &amp; we presume not to judge the thoughts &amp; intentions
<pb n="336"/><anchor id="Pg336"/>
of any, it being Gods owne prerogative, to bring to
light the hidden things of darknes, and to make manifest the
counsels of the hearts; So it cannot be denied, that upon
these passages and proceedings hath followed the interrupting
of the so much longed for Reformation of Religion, of
the setling of Presbyteriall government, and of the suppressing
of heresies and dangerous errors, (which works the
Parliament had taken in hand) the retarding and delaying
the relief of <hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi>, the sowing of the seeds of another War
in <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, the strengthning of the hand of the Malignant &amp;
Episcopall party, the weakning and wounding both of
Magistracy and Ministery: In all which, whether the Army
bee blamelesse and innocent, from ministring occasion
to so great evils, or whether there be not cause for them to
repent and do the first works, and to practise more of that
love, moderation, and meeknesse of Spirit, and of that
zeal against Malignants and Prelaticall persons, which they
have from the beginning professed, and the want whereof
(when suspected in others) they did so much censure; or
whether there be such a thing among them, as adjoyning
with those against whom, and against whose with whom
the Covenant was taken; We leave them in all these to the
search and examination of their own consciences, that they
may stand or fall unto God. For our part, we cannot conceive
how the Proposals of that Army for setling of a Peace,
do in point of Religion consist with the solemn League and
Covenant, or with the Propositions of peace, formerly
agreed upon by both Kingdomes; there being so considerable
omission of divers materiall desires contained in
those former Propositions, concerning the abolition of
Prelacy; concerning the injoyning of the taking of the
Covenant by all his Majesties Subjects, under such penalties
as the Parliaments should agree upon; concerning
the setling of Religion in <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>
and <hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi>, according
to the Covenant, in such manner as both Houses of
Parliament shall agree on, after advice had with the
Assembly of Divines, concerning the setling of uniformity
between the Churches of God in both Kingdomes, according
<pb n="337"/><anchor id="Pg337"/>
to the Covenant, in such manner as shall be agreed
on by both Houses of the Parliament of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, and by the
Church, and Kingdome of <hi rend='italic'>Scotland</hi>, after advice had with
the Divines of both Kingdomes; Also concerning an Act
of Parliament to confirm the calling and sitting of the Assembly
of Divines: All which, with some other particulars
concerning Religion, expressed in the former Propositions,
if they should now be omitted in the setling of a
Peace, the progresse already made, not only in the Assembly
of Divines, but in the Houses of Parliament, in setling
Presbyteriall Government, with the Confession of
Faith, yea the Directory of publike Worship (though
agreed upon by the Assemblies and Parliaments of both
Kingdomes) shall bee but so much lost labour. But beside
these omissions it may be justly doubted whether there be
not in the Proposals of the Army, somewhat for Episcopocy,
and against the Covenant; For wee cannot understand
the eleventh Proposall, in any other sense, but that it
supposeth the continuance of the Ecclesiastical office of Bishops
or Prelats, as well as of any other Church Officers, and
taketh no more from the Prelats, but coercive power or jurisdiction
extending to civil penalties, which indeed belongeth
to no Ecclesisticall Officers. In the twelfth Proposall, wee
do not see, how it can avoid or shun the toleration of Popery,
Superstition, Heresie, Schisme, Profannesse, or whatsoever
works of darknesse shall be practised by such as dispise the
publicke Worship of God in the Church, &amp; have the most unlawful
and wicked meetings else where under a profession of
Religious duties, exercises or ordinances. From the thirteenth
Proposall, we can make no other result, but that in stead
of enjoyning the taking of the Covenant, under such penalties
as the Parliaments in their wisdome shall agree upon,
the former ordinance of Parliament enjoyning the taking of
it, is desired to be repealed: and then what may bee the danger
of those that have taken, or shall take an oath of that kinde, not
enjoyned nor ratified by authority, wee leave it to be judged
by those who know best the Lawes of that Kingdome.
</p>

<p>
One thing more wee Cannot passe, that whereas in the
Armies Declaration, or Representation to the Parliament,
<pb n="338"/><anchor id="Pg338"/>
dated June 14 1647. they mention their Brethren of <hi rend='italic'>Scotland</hi>
as having proceeded in the vindication and defence of their
just rights and liberties, much higher then that Army hath
done; Wee are necessitated to say this much for clearing of
these proceedings in this Nation reflected upon: They of
this Church and Kingdom who joyned together and associated
themselves in this Cause, first by humble Petitions, and
afterwards by Covenant, were so far from slighting or breaking
that Covenant which was taken, that it was the special
visible character by which the friends of the Cause were
distinguished from the enemies thereof and they were so
far from crying down the Ministery and Ecclesiasticall Assemblies,
or from disobeying any Orders or Commands of
Parliament, that a Generall Assembly of the Church, and
a Parliament, were two chief Heads of their Petitions and
desires, at that time when they had neither; And when
they had obtained a Generall Assembly and Parliament,
they chearfully submitted to both respectively.
</p>

<p>
And now the dangers of Religion in this Illand being so
great, as there hath been lately a Solemne Humilitation
throughout this Land, upon occasion of these great and
growing dangers; so we cannot but still look upon them as
matters of frequent Prayer and Humiliation to our selves,
as well as our Brethren in <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, there being much
sin in both Kingdomes procuring all this evill, and justly
deserving these, and heavier judgements. And as wee
desire in the first place to be humbled for our own sins,
and the sins of this Nation, so we trust, our Brethren will
bee willing to be put in minde of the necessity of their Humiliation
and Repentance for the Nationall sins of the
Kingdome; which wee shall wish rather to be sadly considered
by them, then expressed by us. One thing wee
are confident of, that God hath had a speciall controversie
against his People of old for the sin of a broken Covenant,
and unwillingnesse to bee Reformed and Purged
according to the Word of the Lord; and that till their
sinnes were acknowledged and repented, his controversie
did not take an end.
</p>

<pb n="340"/><anchor id="Pg340"/>

<p>
And here is the wisdome and patience of the Saints,
to choose affliction rather then iniquity, to do duety in the
worst of times, and to trust God with events and in so doing,
to hope to the end and wait upon the Lord, untill hee plead
their cause and execute judgement for them: So shall
they bee more purified and not made blacker (as, alas,
some are) but whiter in times of tryall.
</p>

<p>
More particularly, wee do desire that Presbyteriall Government
may be setled and put in practice through out that
Kingdom, according to the Word of God, and example
of the best Reformed Churches: for without this wee know
no other proper and effectuall remedy against the present
dangers of Religion there, or for purging the Church from
scandals, which are destructive either to sound Doctrine,
or to Godlinesse: And herein we are confident, the experience
of all the Reformed Churches will bear witnesse with
us. Nor do we doubt but in <hi rend='italic'>England</hi> also, time and experience
will more and more commend, not only the beautifull
order, but the great utility, yea, necessity of this Government,
and dispell all the clouds of aspersions and prejudices
which it lieth under among such as know it not, who
<pb n="341"/><anchor id="Pg341"/>
ought therefore to beware of speaking evill of the things
they understand not. Yet we would not have our zeal for
Presbyteriall Government mis-understood, as if it tended
to any rigour or domineering over the flock, or to hinder
and exclude that instructing in meeknesse them that oppose
themselves, which the Apostolicall rule holds forth; or
as if wee would have any such to bee intrusted with that
Government, as are found not yet purged, either from
their old profannesse, or from the Prelaticall principles
and practices which were but to put a piece of new cloath
unto an old garment, and so to make the rent worse; or
to put new wine into old bottles, and so to lose both wine
and bottles. Yea who knows whether this may not be one
of the causes, (and not the least) why the present Reformation
succeeds the worse, even because of so little repentance,
either for the profannesse, or Prelaticall errours
and corruptions of divers who have acted in it: Neverthelesse,
the right hand of fellowship is to bee given to all such
as bring forth fruits meet for repentance, whatsoever their
former errours of failings were. And to our great joy, we
understand that there are many learned, able, godly, and
prudent ministers in that Kingdome, fit to be imployed in
that government, together with such able and pious men,
as are to be joyned with them in the capacity of ruling Elders.
It shall be a part of our prayers, that the Lord of
the Harvest may send forth many more labourers in that
Kingdome, where the Harvest is so great and the Labourers
so few proportionably; and in the meane while, that such
as he hath already thrust out, may not be unemployed, as to
the point of discipline and Government.
</p>

<p>
Nor lastly, doth our zeal for the Covenant and Presbyteriall
Government abate or diminish any thing at all from
our Loyalty and Duety to the Kings Majesty, although
Incendiaries and Enemies spare not to reproach this Church
and Kingdome with Disloyaltie: Yet such calumnies will
easily be repudiate by all who will examine the whole
course of the publike proceedings in this Nation, in reference
to the King, and particularly the Declaration of the
Parliament of this Kingdome, dated <hi rend='italic'>January 16. 1647</hi>.
</p>

<pb n="342"/><anchor id="Pg342"/>

<p>
Wherefore passing all such calumnies, whiche cannot but be
hatefull to God and good Men, wee do clearly and candidly
professe, That the Covenant and Presbyteriall Government
are so far from hindering or excluding our duety to the
King, that it is thereby very much strengthened and supported;
for our giving to God what is Gods doth not
hinder us, but help us, to give unto Cæsar what is Cæsars.
And wee earnestly wish his Majesties Royall Heart may bee
graciously inclined to the just desires of his good Subjects in
both Kingdomes, and to that happy settlement of Truth and
Peace, Religion and Righteousnesse, which may be as
well for the establishment of his own Throne, as for the
good of his people.
</p>

<p>
Now the Prince of Peace Himself, grant his afflicted
People, tossed with tempests and not comforted, a safe
and wel-grounded Peace, bring light out of the present
darknesse, and order out of all these confusions, give
unto all who are waiting for the consolation of Israel <hi rend='italic'>good
hope through grace, comfort their hearts, stablish them in every good
word and work</hi>, make his Cause to triumph at last over all opposition,
and the enemies foot to slide in due time, and so
put a new Song of praise in the mouths of his people. Amen.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>24. August 1647. Antemeridiem.</hi> Sess. 19.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act for observing the Directions of the Generall
Assembly for Secret and Private Worship, and
mutuall edification, and censuring such as
neglect Familie Worship.</hi></head>

<p>
The General Assembly, after mature deliberation, doth
approve the following Rules and Directions, for cherishing
Piety and preventing Division and Schisme, and
doth appoint Ministers and Ruling Elders in each Congregation
to take speciall care that these directions be observed
and followed; As likewise that Presbyteries and Provincial
<pb n="343"/><anchor id="Pg343"/>
Synods enquire and make tryall whether the saids Directions
bee duely observed in their bounds, and to reprove or
censure (according to the quality of the offence) such as
shall bee found to be reproveable or censurable therein. And
to the end that these Directions may not be rendred ineffectuall
and unprofitable among some through the usuall neglect
of the very substance of the duty of Family Worship,
The Assembly doth further require and appoint Ministers
and Ruling Elders, to make diligent search and enquiry in
the Congregations committed to their charge respectively,
whether there bee among them any Family or Families
which use to neglect this necessary duty; And if any such
Family be found, the head of that Family is to be first admonished
privately to amend this fault; And in case of his
continuing therein, he is to be gravely and sadly reproved
by the Session. After which reproof, if he be found still
to neglect Familie Worship, Let him be for his obstinacy,
in such an offence, suspended and debarred from the Lords
Supper, as being justly esteemed unworthy to communicate
therein till he amend.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>The Directions of the Generall Assembly, for
Secret and Private Worship &amp; mutuall edification,
for cherishing Piety, for maintaining Unitie,
and avoiding Schisme and Division.</hi></head>

<p>
Besides the publike Worship in Congregations, mercifully
established in this Land, in great purity; It is expedient
and necessary, that Secret Worship of each person
alone, and Private Worship of Families be pressed and set
up: That with Nationall Reformation the profession and
power of Godlinesse both Personall and Domestick bee advanced.
</p>

<p>
I. And first for Secret Worship; It is most necessar, that
every one apart and by themselves be given to Prayer and
<pb n="344"/><anchor id="Pg344"/>
Meditation, The unspeakable benefit whereof is best known
to them who are most exercised therein: This being the
meane whereby in a special way communion with God is entertained,
and right preparation for all other duties obtained;
And therefore it becometh not onely Pastors, within
their severall Charges, to presse Persons of all sorts to performe
this dutie Morning and Evening, and at other occasions,
but also it is incumbent to the head of every Family,
to have a care that both themselves &amp; all within their charge
be daily diligent herein.
</p>

<p>
II. The ordinar duties comprehended under the exercise
of Pietie, which should be in Families when they are conveened
to that effect, are these: First, Prayer and Praises
performed, with a speciall reference as well to the publike
condition of the Kirk of God and this Kingdome, as to the
present case of the Familie, and every member thereof.
Next, Reading of Scriptures with Catechizing in a plaine
way, that the understandings of the simpler may be the beter
enabled to profit under the publike Ordinances, and they
made more capable to understand the Scriptures when they
are read? Together with godly conferences tending to the
edification of all the members in the most holy faith: As also,
admonition and rebuke upon just reasons from these who
have Authority in the Familie.
</p>

<p>
III. As the Charge and Office of interpreting the holy
Scriptures, is a part of the Ministeriall calling, which none
(howsoever otherwise qualified) should take upon him in
any place, but he that is duely called thereunto by God and
his Kirk: So in every Familie where there is any that can
read, The holy Scriptures should be read ordinarily to the
Familie; And it is commendable that thereafter they confer,
and by way of conference make some good use of what hath
beene read and heard: As for example, if any sin be reproved
in the Word read, use may bee made thereof, to make all the
Familie circumspect and watchfull against the same; Or, if any
judgement be threatned or mentioned to have beene inflicted
in that Portion of Scripture which is read, use may bee
made to make all the Familie fear, lest the same or a worse
judgement befall them, unlesse they beware of the sin that
<pb n="345"/><anchor id="Pg345"/>
procured it: And finally, if any duety be required, or comfort
held forth in a promise, use may bee made to stirre up
themselves to imploy Christ for strength to enable them for
doing the commanded duty, and to apply the offered comfort;
In all which the Master of the Familie is to have the
chief hand, And any member of the Familie may propone
ane question or doubt for resolution.
</p>

<p>
IV. The head of the Family is to take care that none of
the Familie withdraw himself from any part of Familie
Worship: And seeing the ordinar performance of all the
parts of Family worship belongeth properly to the head of
the Family, The Minister is to stirre up such as are lasie,
and traine up such as are weak to a fitnesse for these exercises.
It being alwayes free to persons of qualitie to entertain
one approven by the Presbyterie for performing Familie
Exercise; And in other families where the head of the
Familie is unfit, that another constantly residing in
the Familie approven by the Minister and Session, may be
imployed in that service; Wherein the Minister and Session
are to be countable to the Presbyterie. And if a
Minister by divine providence bee brought to any Familie,
It is requisite, that at no time he conveen a part
of the Familie for Worship secluding the rest; Except
in singular cases, specially concerning these parties, which
(in Christian prudence) need not, or ought not to bee
imparted to others.
</p>

<p>
V. Let no Idler who hath no particular calling, or
vagrant Person under pretence of a calling, be suffered
to perform worship in Families, to or for the same: Seeing
persons tainted with errours or aiming at division, may
be ready (after that manner) to creep into houses
and lead captive silly and unstable souls.
</p>

<p>
VI. At Family Worship a speciall care is to be had,
that each Familie keep by themselves: Neither requiring,
inviting, nor admitting persons from divers Families;
Unlesse it be these who are lodged with them or at
meal, or otherwise with them upon some lawfull occasion.
</p>

<pb n="346"/><anchor id="Pg346"/>

<p>
VII. Whatsoever hath been the effects and fruits of
meetings of persons of divers Families in the times of
corruption or trouble (in which cases many things are commendable,
which otherwise are not tolerable), Yet when
God hath blessed us with Peace and the purity of the
Gospel, such meetings of persons of divers Families
(except in the cases mentioned in these Directions) are
to be disapproved, as tending to the hinderance of the
Religious exercise of each Familie by it self, to the prejudice
of the publike Ministery, to the renting of the Families
of particular Congregations, and (in progresse of
time) of the whole Kirk: besides many offences which may
come thereby, to the hardning of the hearts of carnall men,
and grief of the godly.
</p>

<p>
VIII. On the Lords Day, after every one of the Family
apart, and the whole Family together have sought the
Lord (in whose hands the preparation of mens hearts are)
to fit them for the publicke Worship, and to blesse to them
the publike Ordinances; The Master of the Familie ought
to take care that all within his charge repair to the publike
Worship, that he and they may joyne with the rest of the
Congregation; And, the publike Worship being finished,
after prayer, he should take an account what they have heard,
And thereafter to spend the rest of the time which they
may spare, in Catechising and in spirituall conferences upon
the Word of God; Or else (going apart) they ought to
apply themselves to reading, meditation, and secret prayer,
that they may confirme and increase their Communion with
God; That so the profit which they found in the publike
Ordinances may bee cherished and promoved, and they
more edified unto eternall life.
</p>

<p>
IX. So many as can conceive prayer; ought to make use
of that gift of God: Albeit these who are rude and weaker
may begin at a set form of prayer; But so, as they bee not
sluggish in stirring up in themselves (according to their
daily necessities) the spirit of prayer, which is given to all
the children of God in some measure. To which effect,
they ought to bee the more fervent and frequent in secret
prayer to God, for enabling of their hearts to conceive,
<pb n="347"/><anchor id="Pg347"/>
and their tongues to expresse convenient desires to God for
their Familie. And in the mean time, for their greater encouragement,
let these materialls of prayer be meditated
upon, and made use of, as followeth.
</p>

<p>
Let them confesse to God how unworthy they are to come
in his presence, and unfit to worship his Majesty; And
therefore earnestly ask of God the spirit of prayer.
</p>

<p>
They are to confesse their sins, and the sins of the Family
accusing, judging, and condemning themselves for them,
till they bring their souls to some measure of true humiliation.
</p>

<p>
They are to pour out their souls to God, in the Name of
Christ, by the spirit, for forgivinesse of sins, for Grace to
repent, to believe, and to live soberly, righteously, and
godly, and that they may serve God with joy and delight in
walking before him.
</p>

<p>
They are to give thanks to God for his many mercies to
his people, and to themselves, and especially for his love
in Christ, and for the light of the Gospel.
</p>

<p>
They are to pray for such particular benefits, Spirituall
and Temporall, as they stand in need of for the time, (whether
it be Morning or Evening) as health or sicknesse, prosperitie
or adversitie.
</p>

<p>
They ought to pray for the Kirk of Christ in general, for
all the Reformed Kirks, and for this Kirk in particular, and
for all that suffer for the Name of Christ for all our Superiours,
The Kings Majesty, the Queene, and their Children,
for the Magistrates, Ministers, and whole body of
the Congregation whereof they are members, as well for
their Neighbours absent in their lawfull affaires, as for those
that are at home.
</p>

<p>
The prayer may be closed with an earnest desire, that God
may be glorified in the comming of the Kingdome of his
Son, and in the doing of his wil; And with assurance that
themselves are accepted, and what they have asked according
to his will shall be done.
</p>

<p>
X. These exercises ought to be performed in great sinceritie
without delay, laying aside all Exercises of worldly
businesse or hinderances, Notwithstanding the mockings of
<pb n="348"/><anchor id="Pg348"/>
Atheists, and profane men; In respect of the great mercies
of God to this Land, and of his severe Corections wherewith
lately he hath exercised us. And to this effect,
persons of eminency (and all Elders of the Kirk) not onely
ought to stir up themselves and their Families to diligence
herein; But also to concurre effectually, that in all other
Families, where they have Power and Charge, the said
exercises be conscionably performed.
</p>

<p>
XI. Besides the ordinary duties in Families which are
abovementioned, extraordinary duties both of humiliation
and thanksgiving are to bee carefully performed in Families,
when the Lord by extraordinary occasions (private or
publike) calleth for them.
</p>

<p>
XII. Seeing the Word of God requireth, That wee
should consider one another to provoke unto love and good
works, Therefore, at all times, and specially in this time
wherein profanitie abounds, and mockers walking after
their own lusts think it strange that others run not with them
to the same excesse of riot, Every member of this Kirk ought to
stir up themselves and one another to the duties of mutuall
Edification, by instruction, admonition, rebuke, exhorting
one another to manifest the Grace of God, in denying
ungodlinesse and worldly lusts, and in living godly, soberly,
and righteously in this present world, by comforting the
the feeble minded, and praying with, or, for one another;
Which duties respectively are to be performed upon speciall
occasions offered by divine providence; As namely, when
under any calamity, crosse, or great difficultie, counsel or
comfort is sought, Or when an offender is to bee reclaimed
by private admonition, and if that bee not effectuall, by joyning
one or two more in the admonition, according to the rule
of Christ; that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every
word may be established.
</p>

<p>
XIII. And because it is not given to every one to speak
a word in season to a wearied or distressed conscience, It is
expedint, that a person (in that case) finding no ease
after the use of all ordinary means private and publike, have
their addresse to their own Pastour, or some experienced
Christian, But, if the person troubled in conscience be of
<pb n="349"/><anchor id="Pg349"/>
that condition, or of that sex, that discretion, modestie
of fear of scandall, requireth a godly grave and secret friend
to be present with them in their said addresse, It is expedient
that such a friend be present.
</p>

<p>
XIV. When persons of divers Families are brought together
by divine providence, being abroad upon their particular
Vocations, or any necessary occasions, As they would
have the Lord their God with them whithersoever they go,
they ought to walk with God, and not neglect the duties of
Prayer and Thanksgiving, but take care that the same be
performed by such as the company shall judge fittest: And
that they likewise take heed that no corrupt communication
proceed out of their mouth, but that which is good, to the
use of edifying, that it may minister grace to the hearers.
</p>

<p>
The drift and scope of all these Directions is no other, but
that upon the one part, the power and practice of godlinesse
among all the Ministers and Members of this Kirk, according
to their severall places and vocations, may be cherished
and advanced, and all impietie and mocking of Religious
Exercises suppressed; And upon the other part, that under
the name and pretext of Religious Exercises; no such
meetings or practices be allowed, as are apt to breed Error,
Scandall, Schisme, contempt or mis-regard of the
publike Ordinances and Ministers, or neglect of the duties
of particular Callings, or such other evils as are the works
not of the Spirit but of the Flesh, and are contrary to Truth
and Peace.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act against such as withdraw themselves
from the publike Worship in their own Congregation.</hi></head>

<p>
Since it hath pleased God of his infinite goodnesse to blesse
his Kirk within this Nation, with the riches of the Gospel,
in giving to us his Ordinances in great purity, liberty,
and withall, a comely and well-established order: The
Assembly, in the zeal of God, for preserving Order, Unitie
and Peace in the Kirk, for maintaining the respect which
<pb n="350"/><anchor id="Pg350"/>
is due to the Ordinances and Ministers of Jesus Christ, for
preventing Schisme, noisome Errours, and all unlawfull
Practices, which may follow on the Peoples withdrawing
themselves from their own Congregations, Doth charge every
Minister to bee diligent in fulfilling his Ministerie, to be
holy and grave in his conversation, to be faithfull in Preaching,
declaring the whole counsell of God, and as he hath occasion
from the Text of Scripture to reprove the sins and errours,
and presse the duties of the time; and in all those, to
observe the rules prescribed by the Acts of Assembly; wherein
if he be negligent, he is to be censured by his own Presbytery.
As also Ordains every Member in every Congregation
to keep their own Paroch Kirk, to communicate there
in the Word and Sacraments; And if any person or Persons
shall hereafter usually absent themselves from their own Congregations,
except in urgent cases made known to, and approven
by the Presbytery, The Ministers of these Congregations
whereto they resort, shall both in publike by Preching,
and in private admonition, shew their dislike of their
withdrawing from their own Minister; That in so doing,
they may witnesse to all that heare them, their due care to
Strengthen the hands of their fellow labourers in the work
of the Lord, and their detestation of any thing that may tend
to separation, or any of the abovementioned evils; Hereby
their own Flock will be confirmed in their stedfastnesse, and
the unstable spirits of others will be rectified. Likeas the
Minister of that Congregation from which they do withdraw,
shall labour first by private admonition to reclaim
them; And if any after private admonition given by their
own Pastour do not amend, in that case the Pastour shall delate
the foresaid persons to the Session, who shall cite and
censure them as contemners of the comely order of the
Kirk; And if the matter be not taken order with there, It is
to bee brought to the Presbytery: For the better observing
whereof, the Presbyteries at the Visitation of their severall
Kirks, and Provincial Assemblies, in their censure of the several
Presbyteries, shall enquire hereanent: Which inquirie
and report shall be registrate in the Provincial Books, that
their diligence may be seen in the General Assembly.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n="351"/><anchor id="Pg351"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>26. August 1647. Postmeridiem.</hi> Sess. 22.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Approbation of the preceedings of the Commission
of the preceeding Assembly.</hi></head>

<p>
The General Assembly after mature deliberation do
ratifie and approve the whole Acts and Conclusions
of the Commissionners of the preceeding Assembly
for publike affaires now tryed and examined; Declaring
that they have proceeded therein with much
zeal, wisdome, vigilance, and according to ther Commission.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>27. August 1647. Antemeridiem.</hi> Sess. 23.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Approbation of the Confession of Faith.</hi></head>

<p>
A Confession of Faith for the Kirks of God in the three
Kingdomes, being the chiefest part of that Uniformity
in Religion which by the solemne League and Covenant we
are bound to endeavour; And there being accordingly a
Confession of Faith agreed upon by the Assembly of Divines
sitting at <hi rend='italic'>Westminster</hi>, with the assistance of Commissioners
from the Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Scotland</hi>; Which Confession was
sent from our Commissioners at <hi rend='italic'>London</hi> to the Commissioners
of the Kirk met at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>
in <hi rend='italic'>January</hi> last, hath been in
this Assembly twice publikely read over, examined and
considered; Copies thereof being also Printed, that it
might be particularly perused by all the Members of this
Assembly, unto whom frequent intimation was publikely
made, to put in their doubts and objections if they
had any; And the said Confession being upon due examination
thereof found by the Assembly to bee most agreable
to the Word of God, and in nothing contrary
to the received Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government
of this Kirk. And lastly, it being so necesary
and so much longed for, That the said Confession be
<pb n="352"/><anchor id="Pg352"/>
with all possible diligence and expedition approved and established
in both Kingdoms, as a principal part of the intended
Uniformity in Religion, and as a special means for
the more effectual suppressing of the many dangerous errours
and heresies of these times; The General Assembly doth
therefore after mature diliberation agree unto and approve
the said Confession as to the truth of the matter (judging it
to be most orthodox and grounded upon the Word of God)
and also as to the point of Uniformity. Agreeing for our
part that it be a common Confession of Faith for the three
Kingdomes. The Assembly doth also blesse the Lord; and
thankfully acknowledge his great mercy, in that so excellent
a Confession of Faith is prepared, and thus far agreed
upon in both Kingdomes; which we look upon as a great
strengthning of the true Reformed Religion against the common
enemies thereof. But lest our intention and meaning
be in some particulars misunderstood, It is hereby expresly
Declared and Provided, that the not mentioning in this
Confession the several sort of Ecclesiastical Officers and Assemblies,
shall be no prejudice to the Truth of Christ in
these particulars to be expressed fully in the Directory of
Government. It is further Declared, that the Assembly understandeth
some parts of the second Article of the thirty one
Chapter, only of Kirks not settled or constituted in point
of Government, And that although in such Kirks, a Synod
of Ministerrs and other fit persons may be called by the Magistrates
authority and nomination without any other Call,
to consult and advise with about matters of Religion; And
although likewise the Ministers of Christ without delegation
from their Churches, may of themselves, and by vertue
of their Office meet together Synodically in such Kirks
not yet constituted; Yet neither of these ought to be done
in Kirks constituted and setled: It being always free to the
Magistrate to advise with Synods of Ministers and ruling Elders
meeting upon delegation from their Churches, either
ordinarly, or being indicted by his Authority occasionally
and <hi rend='italic'>pro re nata</hi>; It being also free to assemble together
Synodically, as well <hi rend='italic'>pro re nata</hi>, as at the ordinary times upon
delegation from the Churches, by the intrinsical power received
<pb n="353"/><anchor id="Pg353"/>
from Christ, as often as it is necessary for the good of the
Church so to assemble, in case the Magistrate to the detriment
of the Church withhold or deny his consent, the necessity
of occasionall Assemblies being first remonstrate unto
him by humble supplication.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh 28. August 1647. Postmeridiem.</hi> Sess. 25.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act for revising the Paraphrase of the Psalmes
brought from</hi> England, <hi rend='italic'>with a recommendation
for Translating the other Scriptuall
Songs in Meeter.</hi></head>

<p>
The General Assembly having considered the report of the
Committee, concerning the Paraphrase of the Psalmes
sent from <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>: And finding that it is very necessary, that
the said Paraphrase be yet revised; Therefore doth appoint
Master <hi rend='italic'>John Adamson</hi> to examine the first fourty Psalmes, Master
<hi rend='italic'>Thomas Craufurd</hi> the second fourty,
Master <hi rend='italic'>John Row</hi> the
third fourty, and Master <hi rend='italic'>John Nevey</hi> the last thirty Psalms of
that Paraphrase; and in their Examination they shall not
only observe what they think needs to be amended, but also
to set downe their own essay for correcting thereof; And for
this purpose recommends to them, to make use of the travels
of <hi rend='italic'>Rowallen</hi>, Master
<hi rend='italic'>Zachary Boyd</hi>, or of any other on
that subject, but especially of our own Paraphrase, that what
they find better in any of these Works may be chosen: and
likewise they shall make use of the animadversions sent from
Presbyteries, who for this cause are hereby desired to hasten
their observations unto them; And they are to make report
of their labours herein to the Commission of the Assembly
for publike affaires against their first meeting in <hi rend='italic'>February</hi>
next: And the Commission after revising thereof, shall
send the same to Provincial Assemblies, to bee transmitted
<pb n="354"/><anchor id="Pg354"/>
to Presbyteries, that by their further consideration, the
matter may be fully prepared to the next Assembly: And
because some Psalmes in that Paraphrasie sent from <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>
are composed in verses which do not agree with the Common-tunes,
Therefore it is also recommended that these
Psalms be likewise turned in other verses which may agree
to the Common-tunes, that is, having the first line of eight
syllabs, and the second line of six, that so both versions
being together, use may bee made of either of them in Congregations
as shall bee found convenient: And the Assembly
doth further recommend, That M. <hi rend='italic'>Zachary Boyd</hi> be at
the paines to translate the other Scriptural Songs in meeter,
and to report his travels also to the Commission of Assembly,
that after their Examination thereof, they may send
the same to Presbyteries to be there considered untill the
next Generall Assembly.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act recommending the execution of the Act of
Parliament at Perth, for uplifting pecuniall paines to
bee imployed upon pious uses, and of all Acts of Parliament
made against excommunicate Persons.</hi></head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly doth seriously Recommend and
Ordain That Presbyteries diligently endeavour,
that the ninth Act of the Parliament holden at <hi rend='italic'>Perth, Anno
1645.</hi> Concerning the uplifting of pecunial paines to bee
imployed upon pious uses, may bee put to due execution
within their several bounds; And also that the Acts of
Parliament against excommunicate Persons, especially the
twentieth Act of Parliament in March last, be also carefully
execute: And that they cause use all diligence to
that effect, and account hereof shall be required in Provinciall
and Generall Assemblies.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n="355"/><anchor id="Pg355"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Ult. August 1647. Antemeridiem.</hi> Sess. 26.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act discharging the importing, venting or
spreading of erronious Books or Papers.</hi></head>

<p>
The General Assembly considering how the errours of
Independency and Separation (have in our Neighbour
Kingdome of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>) spread as a Gangræn,
and do daily eat as a Canker; In so much that exceeding
many Errours. Heresies, Schismes, and Blaspemies, have
issued therefrom, and sheltered thereby; And how possible
it is, for the same evils to invade, and overspread
this Kirk and Kingdome, (lying within the same Island)
by the spreading of their erronious Books, Pamphlets,
Lybels, and Letters, and by conversing with them that
are infected with these errours, except the same bee timeously
prevented; Doe therefore, in the Name of God,
Inhibit and Discharge all Members of this Kirk and Kingdome,
to converse with Persons tainted with such errours;
Or to import, sell, spread, vent, or disperse such erronious
Books or Papers: But that they beware of, and abstain
from Books maintaineing Independencie or Separation,
and from all Antinomian, Anabaptisticall, and other erronious
Books, and Papers; Requiring all Ministers to
warne their flocks against such Bookes in generall, and particularly
such as are most plausible, insinuating, and dangerous:
And to try carefully from time to time if any such
Bookes be brought into this Countrey from <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, or
from byond Seas (which is especially recommended to Ministers
on Sea Coasts, or Towns where any Stationers are)
and if any shall be found, to present the same to the Presbyterie,
that some course may be taken to hinder the dispersing
thereof: And hereby all Presbyteries, and Synods,
are ordained to try and Processe such as shall transgresse against
the premisses or any part of the same. And the Assembly
also doth seriously recommend to Civill Magistrates,
that they may be pleased to be assisting to Ministers and Presbyteries
in execution of this Act, and to concurre with
their authority in every thing to that effect.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="356"/><anchor id="Pg356"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act for debarring of Complyers in the first
Classe from Ecclesiastick office.</hi></head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly Declares and Ordaines, That
no Person who is guilty of Compliance in the first
Classe mentioned in the Act of the preceeding Assembly,
shall bee received in any Ecclesiasticall charge, untill
the evidence of his repentance before the Presbyterie and
Congregation be reported to the Synode to which he belongs,
and to the Generall Assembly, and their consent
obtained for his bearing office. And if any such Person be
already received unto the Eldership of any particular Congregation,
yet he shall not be admitted to be a Member of
any Presbyterie, Synode, or Generall Assemblie, untill
(upon the evidence of his repentance) the consent and
approbation of these judicatories respectively bee obtained
thereto.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act for pressing and furthering the
plantation of Kirks.</hi></head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly considering how the Work of
Provision, Plantation, convenient Dividing, Dismembring,
better uniting or enlarging of Parish
Kirks is hitherto foreslowed, to the great prejudice of many
Ministers, many good People, and hinderance of the Work
of Reformation; Doth therefore Ordaine, That all Presbyteries
have speciall care that the present opportunity bee
diligently improved by all their Members, as need is, before
the Commission for Plantation of Kirks, as they would
not be found censurable for neglect. And that every Presbytery
send in to the next Generall Assembly the names of
all their Parishes, with declaration which of them have Ministers,
which not, what is the largenesse of the bounds,
<pb n="357"/><anchor id="Pg357"/>
commodious or incommodious situation of each Parish
Kirk, what is the number of Communicants, what Kirks
are under Patrons, what not, who are the severall Patrons,
what is the nature and quantitie of the present provision, or
possible ground of further provision for competent Maintence,
where the same is not sufficiently provided already: As
also, what Parishes are united or disunited or bettered already,
and in what measure by the said Commission, that the
Generall Assembly being acquaint therewith, may doe accordingly
both for censuring Neglecters, and finding out
Overtures for better furtherance of the Work for time
to come. Moreover it is hereby Ordained, That the
next ensuing Provinciall Synodes, crave account of the severall
Presbyteries their diligence, And presse that they
have it ready in writ to present to the Provinciall Synodes in
April next to come, that so all may be in readinesse and the
full account made at the next General Assembly.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act for censuring absents from the
Generall Assembly.</hi></head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly considering the absence of many
Commissioners in this and other preceeding Assemblies,
and that many of those present have gone from the Assembly
before the dissolving thereof: Therefore, for remedie
hereof in time coming Doth Ordaine, that hereafter Every
Commissioner from Presbyteries and Universities who shall
be absent from the Assembly without a reasonable excuse
notified to the Assembly, Or who being present shall goe
from the Assembly before the dissolving thereof without a
licence, shall be suspended by the Assembly untill the Provinciall
Synode next thereafter following.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="358"/><anchor id="Pg358"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Renovation of former Acts of Assembly for
Triall and Admission of Expectants
to the Ministrie.</hi></head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly, doth hereby renew and confirme
all former Acts and Ordinances for triall and admission
of Expectants to the Ministery; Especially the Articles
thereanentt allowed by the Generall Assembly 1596,
and approven in the Assemblie at <hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi> 1638. The thirteenth
Article concerning the age of intrants to the Ministery
and the twentie fourth Article concerning the triall of
Expectants, Of an Act of the said Assembly at <hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi>, Sess. 23
And the Act of the Assembly at St <hi rend='italic'>Andrews</hi> 1642. Sess. 7,
concerning Lists for presentations from the King, and the
trial of Expectants, &amp;c. Ordaining Presbyteries to observe
the same carefully in all time coming.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Eodem die</hi>, Sess. 28.
<hi rend='italic'>Postmeridiem.</hi></head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Renovation of the Commission for prosecuting
the Treaty for Uniformity in</hi> England.</head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly, Taking to their consideration
that the Treaty of Uniformity in Religion in all his Majesties
Dominions is not yet perfected; Therefore, Renews
the Power and Commission granted by preceeding Assemblies
for prosecuting that Treaty, unto the Persons afternamed,
<hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi> Master <hi rend='italic'>Robert Douglas</hi> Master
<hi rend='italic'>Samuel Rutherford</hi>, Master <hi rend='italic'>Robert Baillie</hi>,
Master <hi rend='italic'>George Gillespie</hi>, Ministers: And
<hi rend='italic'>John</hi> Earle of Lauderdaill, <hi rend='italic'>John</hi> Lord
Balmerino, and Sir <hi rend='italic'>Archibald Johnstoun</hi> of Waristoun Elders;
Authorizing them
with full Power to prosecute the said Treaty of Uniformity
<pb n="359"/><anchor id="Pg359"/>
with the Honourable Houses of the Parliament of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>,
and the Reverend Assembly of Divines there, or any
Committees appointed by them: And to doe all and every
thing which may advance, perfit, and bring that Treaty
to an happy conclusion, conforme to the Commissions
given thereanent.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Renovation of the Commission for the publike
affaires of the Kirk.</hi></head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly taking to their consideration,
that in respect the great Work of Uniformity in Religion
in all his Majesties Dominions is not yet perfected,
(though by the Lords blessing there is a good progresse made
in the same) there is a necessity of renewing the Commissions
granted formerly for prosecuting and perfecting that
great Work; Doe therefore renew the Power and Commission
granted for the publike Affaires of the Kirk by the Generall
Assmblies held in St. <hi rend='italic'>Andrews</hi> 1642.
and at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>
1643. 1644. 1645. and 1646. unto the Persons following,
<hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi> Masters, <hi rend='italic'>Alexander Casse,
Samuel Douglas, Robert Knox,
William Penman, James Guthrie, Robert Cuninghame, David
Fletcher, Robert Lawder, Andrew Stevenson, Robert Davidson,
David Calderwood, James Fleming, Robert Ker, James Fairlie,
Oliver Colt, Patrick Sibbald, Andrew Ramsay, John Adamson,
Robert Douglas, William Colvill, George Gillespe, Mungo Law,
Andrew Fairfoul, George Lesly, Robert Lawrie, Alexander
Spittle, Alexander Dickson, John Hay, Thomas Vassie, Ephraim
Melvill, Patick Scheill, Alexander Simmervail, George Bennet,
Alexander Levingstoun, Robert Murray, Alexander Rollock,
William Menzies, Alexander Ireland, John Friebairn, George
Murray, Henrie Guthrie, William Justice, Robert Wright, Henrie
Livingstoun, James Hammiltoun, George Gladstanes, Bernard
Sanderson, Andrew Lawder, George Rutherfurd, John Levingston,
George Hutheson, John Bell, Heugh Mackaile, John Nevey,
Matthew Brisbane, John Hammiltoun, Allan Ferguson, David
Dickson, Zachary Boyd, Robert Ramsay, Robert Bailie, James
<pb n="360"/><anchor id="Pg360"/>
Nesmith, Francis Aird, Robert Birnie, Thomas Kirkaldie,
Evan Cameron, Robert Blair, Coline Adam, George Hammiltoun,
Samuel Rutherford, Alexander Colvill, John Ramsay, James Martein,
William Levingstoun, Thomas Melvill, John Smith, Fredrick
Carmichaell, Patrick Gillespie, Alexander Moncreif, John
Duncan, James Sibbald, Walter Bruce, George Pittillo, Andrew
Affleck, John Barclay, Thomas Peirson, William Rait, David
Srachan, Andrew Cant, William Douglas, John Forbes, George
Sharp, William Chalmer, Joseph Brodie, Alexander Simmer,
Gillbert Anderson, William Smith</hi> Ministers; And <hi rend='italic'>Archibald</hi>
Marques of Argile, <hi rend='italic'>John</hi> Earle of Crawford,
<hi rend='italic'>Alexander</hi> E. of Eglintoun, <hi rend='italic'>William</hi> E. of
Glencairne, <hi rend='italic'>John</hi> E. of Cassils, <hi rend='italic'>James</hi> E.
of Home, <hi rend='italic'>James</hi> E. of Tullibairdine, <hi rend='italic'>Francis</hi>
E. of Bukeleuch, <hi rend='italic'>John</hi> E. of Lawderdaill,
<hi rend='italic'>William</hi> E. of Lothian, <hi rend='italic'>James</hi> E. of
Finlatour, <hi rend='italic'>William</hi> E. of Lanerk, <hi rend='italic'>James</hi>
Earle of Callendar, <hi rend='italic'>Archibald</hi> Lord Angus,
<hi rend='italic'>George</hi> L. Brichen, <hi rend='italic'>John</hi> L. Yester,
<hi rend='italic'>John</hi> L. Balmerino, <hi rend='italic'>James</hi> L. Cowper,
<hi rend='italic'>John</hi> Lord Bargenie, Sir <hi rend='italic'>Archibald
Johnstoun</hi> of Waristoun, Sir <hi rend='italic'>John Hope</hi> of Craighall,
<hi rend='italic'>Arthur Areskine</hi> of Scotiscraig, <hi rend='italic'>Alexander
Fraser</hi> of Phillorth, <hi rend='italic'>Frederick Lyon</hi> of Brigtoun,
<hi rend='italic'>James Mackdougall</hi> of Garthland, Sir <hi rend='italic'>William
Cockburne</hi> of Langton, Sir <hi rend='italic'>Andrew Ker</hi> of Greinheid, Sir
<hi rend='italic'>Heugh Campbell</hi> of Cesnock, Sir <hi rend='italic'>James
Levingstoun</hi> of Kilsyth, Sir <hi rend='italic'>Thomas Ruthven</hi> of
<hi rend='italic'>Freeland</hi>, Sir <hi rend='italic'>Gilbert Ramsay</hi> of Balmayne,
<hi rend='italic'>John Henderson</hi> of Fordell, <hi rend='italic'>Walter Dundas</hi>
younger of that ilk, Sir <hi rend='italic'>William Scot</hi>
younger of Harden, Sir <hi rend='italic'>Lodovick Gordoun</hi>, Master
<hi rend='italic'>George Winthame</hi> of Libertoun, <hi rend='italic'>Alexander
Levingstoun</hi> of Saltcoats, <hi rend='italic'>John Birsbane</hi> of Bishoptoun, Sir
<hi rend='italic'>Robert Douglas</hi> of Tilliquhillie,
<hi rend='italic'>James Pringle</hi> of Torwoodlie, Sir <hi rend='italic'>Iames
Nicolsone</hi> of Colbrandspath, <hi rend='italic'>William Ker</hi> of Newtoun,
<hi rend='italic'>William Forbes</hi> younger of Lesly, <hi rend='italic'>John
Kennedy</hi> of Carmucks, <hi rend='italic'>Robert Arburthnot</hi>
of Findowrie, <hi rend='italic'>Alexander Brodie</hi> of Letham, Master
<hi rend='italic'>Robert Narne</hi> younger of Strathurd, Master <hi rend='italic'>James
Schoneir</hi> of Caskeberrie, <hi rend='italic'>James Ruchheid, Lawrence Hendersone,
James Stewart, David Douglas, John Jaffray, George Porterfield,
John Semple, John Kennedy, William Glendinning</hi>, Master <hi rend='italic'>John
Cowan, John Mill</hi> Elders: Giving unto them full Power and
Commission, to doe all and every thing for prosecuting,
advancing, perfecting, and bringing the said Work of
<pb n="361"/><anchor id="Pg361"/>
Uniformity in Religion in all his Majesties Dominions to a
happy conclusion, conform to the former Commissions granted
by preceding Assemblies thereanent. And to that effect,
Appoints them or any seventeene of them, whereof thirteene
shall bee Ministers, to meet heer in this City in the
afternoone at four hours, and thereafter upon the last Wednesdayes
of November, February, and May next, and
upon any other day, and in any other place they shall think
fit. Renewing also to the Persons before named, the Power
contained in the Act of the Assembly 1643. intituled,
<hi rend='italic'>A reference to the Commission anent the Persons designed to repaire to
the Kingdome of England</hi>; As likewise the Power contained in
the Act of Assemblie 1644. Sess. 6. for sending Ministers to
the Armie. And further, in case Dilinquents have no constant
residence in any one Presbyterie; Or if Presbyteries be
negligent or overawed, in these cases, The Assemblie
gives to the Persons before named, full power of censuring
Complyers and Persons disaffected to the Covenant according
to the Acts of Assemblie; Declaring always and Providing,
that Ministers shall not bee deposed but in one of the
Quarterly meetings of this Commission; With full power to
them to treat and determine in the matters aforesaid, and in
all other matters referred unto them by this Assemblie, as
fully and freely as if the same were here particularly expressed,
and with as ample power as any Commission of any former
Generall Assemblies hath had, or been in use of before;
They being alwayes for their whole proceedings countable
to, and censurable by the next Generall Assembly.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Desires and Overtures from the Commissioners
of Universities, and the Assemblies
answer thereto.</hi></head>

<p>
1. The Commissioners of Universities represents to the
Assembly: First, That the Overtures of the Assembly
1643. for the visitation of Schools and advancement of
Learning are very much neglected.
</p>

<pb n="362"/><anchor id="Pg362"/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Assembly recommends to Synodes to take account of the observation
of these Overtures.</hi>
</p>

<p>
2. That it were good to exhort all the Universities, to
be careful to take account of all their Schollers on the Sabbathday
of the Sermons, and of their lessons or the Catechisme.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Assembly approves this Overture, and recommends accordingly.</hi>
</p>

<p>
3. That all the Universities bee exhorted to send their commissioners
instructed with answers to the Overtures agreed
upon by the Commissioners of Universities, and which
from this meeting or their Commissioners shall bee communicate
to them, and this to bee when their Commissioners
come in Februar or March to the Commission of the
Kirk.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Assemblie reccommends to Universities to bee carefull
hereof.</hi>
</p>

<p>
4. That the Overtures concerning the providing of
Bursars for Divinity be recommended to Presbyteries and
Synodes, and that they report their diligence to the next
Assembly.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Assembly allowes this Article, and recommends accordingly.</hi>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh 1. September 1647.</hi> Sess. Ult.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>The Assemblies Letter to their Countreymen
in</hi> Poleland, Swedland, Denmarke,
<hi rend='italic'>and</hi> Hungarie.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Unto the Scots Merchants and others our Countrey People scattered
in</hi> Poleland, Swedland, Denmark, <hi rend='italic'>and</hi> Hungary;
<hi rend='italic'>The General Assembly of the Kirk of</hi> Scotland
<hi rend='italic'>wisheth Grace Mercy &amp;
Peace from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Although this Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Scotland</hi>, whiles spoiled of her Liberties
under the Prelatical tyrannie, had much difficultie
<pb n="363"/><anchor id="Pg363"/>
and wrestling to preserve the true reformed Religion
from being quite extinguished among ourselves; yet since
the mighty &amp; out-stretched arme of the Lord our God hath
brought us out of that <hi rend='italic'>Egypt</hi>, and hath restored to us well
constituted and free national Synods, It hath been our desire
and endeavour to set forward the Kingdom of our Lord
Jesus Christ and the purity of his Ordinances, not only
throughout this Nation, but in other parts also so far as God
gave us a call and opportunity and opened a way unto us. And
among other things of this nature we have more particularly
taken into our serious thoughts the sad and lamentable
condition of many thousands of you our Country-men who
are scattered abroad as sheepe having no shepherd, and are
through the want of the meanes of knowledge grace and
salvation, exposed to the greatest spirituall dangers, whether
through ignorance or through manifold tentations to errors
and false Religions, or through the occasions and snares of
sinne.
</p>

<p>
Wee have therefore thought it incumbent to us to put you
in minde of the one thing necessary, while you are so carefull
and troubled about the things of the world. And although
we do not disallow your going abroad to follow any
lawfull calling or way of lively hood, yet seeing it cannot
profit a man although he should gain the whole world and
lose his own soul, and seeing you have travelled so farre,
and taken so much pains to get uncertain riches which cannot
deliver in the day of the wrath of the Lord, and which men
know not who shall inherit; We doe from our affection
to the salvation of your immortall souls most earnestly beseech
and warn you to cry after knowledge and lift up your
voyce for understanding, seeking her as silver, and searching
for her as for hid treasures, and so play the wise Merchants
in purchasing the Pearl of Price, and in laying up a sure
foundation for the time to come, by acquainting your souls
with Jesus Christ, and by faith taking hold of him whose
free grace is now offered and held out to sinners, excluding
none among all the kindreds of the earth who will
come unto him. God forbid that you should let slip the time
<pb n="364"/><anchor id="Pg364"/>
and offers of grace, or neglect any warning of this kinde sent
to you in the name of the Lord. We shall hope better things
of you, and that knowing the acceptable time and the day
of salvation will not alwayes last, but the Lord Jesus is to
be revealed from heaven with his mighty Angels, in flaming
fire taking vengeance on them that know not God and
obey not the Gospel, you will the rather bestirre your selves
timely and with all diligence to seek the Lord while
he may bee found, to endeavour that you may have among
you the ordinary means of grace and salvation, to pray that
God would give you Pastors according to his heart, who
shall feede you with knowledge and understanding, to consult
also and agree among your selves with consent of your
Superiors under whom you live (whose favour and good
will we trust will not be wanting to you in so good and necessary
a work) for setting up the worship of God and Ecclesiasticall
Discipline among you according to the form
established and received in this your mother Kirk, and for a
way of settled maintenance to Pastors and Teachers, Which
if you do, our Commissioners appointed to meet from time
to time in the intervall betwixt this and the next Nationall
Assembly, will bee ready (upon your desire made known
to them) to provide some able and godly Ministers for you,
as likewise to communicate to you our Directory for the
publike worship of God, and our form of Ecclesiastical Government
and Discipline; together with the Confession of
Faith and Catechisme.
</p>

<p>
And in the meane time we exhort you that you neglect not
the Worship of God in secret and in your families, and that
ye continue stedfast in the Profession of that faith in which
yee were baptised, and by a godly, righteous, and sober
conversation adorn the Gospel; and with all, that distance
of place make you not the lesse sensible of your Countries
sufferings, both in respect of the just judgements of God for
the sinnes of the land, and in respect of the malice of Enemies
for the Common Cause &amp; Covenant of the three Kingdoms,
of which happie conjunction, notwithstanding we
do not repent us, but by the grace of God shall continue
faithful and steadfast therein.
</p>

<pb n="365"/><anchor id="Pg365"/>

<p>
This Letter wee have thought fit to bee Printed and published,
that it may be with the greater ease and conveniency
conveyed to the many several places of your habitation or
traffique. Consider what we have said, and the Lord give
you understanding in all things. The grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ be with you all, Amen.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh, August 31. 1647.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Subscribed in name of the Generall
Assembly of the Kirk of Scotland
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mr Robert Douglasse</hi> Moderator.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act concerning the Hundred and eleven Propositions
therein mentioned.</hi></head>

<p>
Being tender of so great an ingagement by Solemn
Covenant, sincerely, really, and constantly to endeavour
in our Place, and Callings, the preservation
of the Reformed Religion in this Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Scotland</hi>, in Doctrine,
Worship, Discipline, and Government, the Reformation
of Religion in the Kingdomes of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, and
<hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi>, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government,
according to the Word of God, and the example of
the best Reformed Kirks, and to endeavour the nearest Conjunction
and Uniformity in all these, together with the
extirpation of Heresie, Schisme, and whatsoever shall
bee found contrary to sound Doctrine: And considering
withall that one of the speciall meanes which it becometh
us in our Places and Callings to use in pursuance of
these ends, is in zeal for the true Reformed Religion, to give
our publike testimony against the dangerous Tenents of
<hi rend='italic'>Erastianisme</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Independencie</hi>,
and which is falsely called <hi rend='italic'>Liberty
of Conscience</hi>, which are not only contrary to sound Doctrine,
but more speciall lets and hinderances, as well to the preservation
of our own received Doctrine, Worship, Discipline,
and Government, as to the Work of Reformation and Uniformity
in <hi rend='italic'>England</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi>.
The Generall Assembly
<pb n="366"/><anchor id="Pg366"/>
<note place='margin'>Not that they are
to be heer Printed, but because they
being to be Printed severally, this Act is
to be prefixed to them.</note>
upon these considerations, having heard publikely read
the CXI following Propositions exhibited
and tendered by some Brethren, who were
appointed to prepare Articles or Propositions
for the vindication of the Trueth in these
particulars, Doth unanimously approve &amp;
agree unto these eight generall Heads of Doctrine
therein contained and asserted, <hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi> 1. That the Ministery
of the Word and the Administration of the Sacraments
of the New Testament, Baptisme and the Lords Supper,
are standing Ordinances instituted by God himself to
continue in the Church to the end of the World. 2. That
such as Administer the Word and Sacraments, ought to be
duely called and ordained thereunto. 3. That some Ecclesiasticall
censures are proper and peculiar to be inflicted onely
upon such as bear Office in the Kirk; Other censures are
common and may bee inflicted both on Ministers and other
Members of the Kirk. 4. That the censure of suspension
from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, inflicted because
of grosse ignorance, or because of a scandalous life and conversation,
As likewise the censure of Excommunication or
calling out of the Kirk flagitious or contumacious offenders,
both the one censure and the other is warranteble by and
grounded upon the Word of God, and is necessary (in respect
of divine institution) to be in the Kirk. 5. That as
the Rights, Power, and Authority of the Civill Magistrate
are to bee maintained according to the Word of God, and
the Confessions of the Faith of the Reformed Kirks; So it
is no lesse true and certaine, that Jesus Christ, the onely
Head and onely King of the Kirk, hath instituted and appointed
a Kirk Government distinct from the Civill Government
or Magistracie. 6: That the Ecclesiastical Government
is committed and intrusted by Christ to the Assemblies of
the Kirk, made up of the Ministers of the Word and Ruling
Elders. 7. That the lesser and inferiour Ecclesiasticall
Assemblies, ought to bee subordinate and subject unto the
greater and superiour Assemblies. 8. That notwithstanding
hereof, the Civill Magistrate may and ought to
suppresse by corporall or Civill punishments, such as
<pb n="367"/><anchor id="Pg367"/>
by spreading Errour or Heresie, or by fomenting Schisme
greatly dishonour God, dangerously hurt Religeon and disturbe
the Peace of the Kirk. Which Heads of Doctrine
(howsoever opposed by the authors and fomenters of the
foresaid errours respectively) the Generall Assembly doth
firmely beleeve, own, maintaine, and commend unto
others, as Solide, True, Orthodoxe, grounded upon the
Word of God, consonant to the judgement both of the ancient
and the best Reformed Kirk; And because this Assembly
(through the multitude of other necessary and pressing
bussinesse) cannot now have so much leisure, as to examine
and consider particularly the foresaid CXI. Propositions;
Therefore, a more particular examination thereof
is committed and referred to the Theologicall faculties in
the four Universities of this Kingdome, and the judgement
of each of these faculties concerning the same, is appointed
to bee reported to the next Generall Assembly. In the
meane while, these Propositions shall bee Printed, both
that Copies thereof may bee sent to Presbyteries, and that
it may be free for any that pleaseth to peruse them, and to
make known or send their judgement concerning the same to
the said next Assembly.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Desires and Overtures presented from Presbyteries
and Synods, with the Assemblies
answer thereunto.</hi></head>

<p>
It is humbly presented to the Assembly, that the children
of many of the ordinary beggars want baptisme,
Themselves also living in great vilenesse, and therefore
desire that some remedie may be provided for these abuses.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Assembly doth seriously recommend to Presbyteries to consider
of the best remedies, and to report their opinions to the
next Assembly.</hi>
</p>

<pb n="368"/><anchor id="Pg368"/>

<p>
That all Students of Philosophie at their entry and at their
Lawreation, bee holden to subscribe the League and Covenant
and be urged thereto, and all other Persons as they come
to age and discretion before their first receiving the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Assembly approves this Overture.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Whereas divers Ministers want Mansses and Gleebs, and
others have their Gleeb so divided in parcells, or lying so
Farre from their Charges the Ministers are thereby much
prejudged; We desire that this Generall Assembly will recommend
it to bee helped by the Parliament, or Committee
for planting of Kirks, in the best manner that their Lordships
can advise.
</p>

<p>
Whereas divers Kirks were incommodiously united in
corrupt times, we desire that the same be now dismembered
and adjoyned to other Kirks, or erected in Kirks by
themselves alone, and when the present incumbents agrees
thereto, we desire the same to bee recommend to the Parliament
and Committee for plantation of Kirks, Provided
alwayes, that the present Ministers who have laboured and
indured the heat of day, may enjoy the benefit of such parcells
as are taken from them during their life.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Assembly doth approve these two Articles, and Recommends
to the Commissioners for publike Affaires to assist
any interested in the particulars for prosecuting the same before
the Honourable Estates of Parliament, or the Commission
appointed by them for plantation of Kirks.</hi>
</p>

<p>
The Generall Assembly, Doe yet againe recommend to
Presbyteries and Provinciall Assemblies, to consider all
matters formerly referred unto them by preceding Assemblies,
and desires that their opinions concerning the same,
be reported in writ to the next Generall Assembly.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>It is this day appointed, that the next Generall Assembly shall meet
at</hi> Edinburgh <hi rend='italic'>the second Wednesday of July 1648.</hi>
</p>

<p>
A. Ker.
</p>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<pb n="369"/><anchor id="Pg369"/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>The Generall Assembly, At <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Iuly 12. 1648. <hi rend='italic'>Post meridiem,</hi> Sess. 1.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>The Letter from the Synod of Divines in</hi> England
<hi rend='italic'>to the Generall Assembly.</hi></head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Right Honourable, right Reverend, and dearly beloved
brethen in</hi> JESUS CHRIST,
</p>

<p>
As we have great cause to blesse God for the brotherly
Union of these two Nations in the common
Cause of Religion and Liberty, and for that good
hand of blessing which hath accompanied the
joynt endeavours of both, in the prosecution thereof: So
we cannot but be sadly and deeply sensible of those many
obstructions and difficulties, wherewith God in his wisdom
hath seen good to exercise his Servants in both Kingdoms
in the carrying on of that work, wherein they stand so
much ingaged. Herein he hath clearly manifested his own
power, wisdom, and goodnesse for our encouragement
to trust him in the managing of his own Work, and our utter
inability to effect it of our selves, thereby to train us up
to a more humble and faithfull dependency upon him to
do all, when we by our own wisdom and strength
can do nothing. Our perplexities we must confesse, are
<pb n="370"/><anchor id="Pg370"/>
and have been many, and yet in the midst of them all we cannot
but thankfully acknowledge it is a token for good, and
that which hath bin and still is a great comfort and refreshing
to our hearts, that God hath given you wisdom timely to
foresee approaching dangers, but especially to behold, as
the stedfastnesse of your Faith, in that both formerly you
have been and at present are able to trust God in straits and
to appear for him in greatest dangers, so your eminent faithfulnesse
and integrity in your firm adhering to your first principles,
and chiefly in your constancy and zeal for the preservation
and prosecution of the Solemn League and Covenant,
so Religiously ingaged in by both Kingdoms: In
your vigorous pursuance whereof, with much thankfulnesse
to God, We are very sensible more particularly of your
steering so steady, and even a course between the dangerous
rocks of Prophanesse and Malignancie on the one hand, and
of Errour, Schisme, Heresie and Blasphemy on the other
hand; as also of your constant desires and endeavours to preserve
the Peace and Union between the two Nations so
nearly and so many wayes United. In all which we humbly
acknowledge the mercy and faithfulnesse of God in guiding
you so graciously hitherto; and through his assistance we shall
still be ready to afford you the best help &amp; incouragement of
our prayers and praises to God on your behalf; having this
confidence that he who hath already vouchsafed you and us
so many blessed pledges of his favour, will in his own time
and way accomplish his own Work, which so much concerneth
his own Glory and his Peoples good. To his most
gracious protection &amp; guidance in these doubtfull and dangerous
times we humbly commend you and all your holy endeavours,
and rest.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Westminster</hi> June 7. 1648.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Subscribed in the name and by the apointment
of the whole Assembly by us.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Direct</hi>
</p>

<p>
To the Right Honourable,
Right Reverend, the
Generall Assembly of the
Church of Scotland,
or their Commissioners.
</p>

<p>
Charles Harle, <hi rend='italic'>Prolocutor.</hi><lb/>
William Gouge, <hi rend='italic'>Assessor.</hi><lb/>
Henry Robrough, <hi rend='italic'>Scribe.</hi><lb/>
Adoniram Byfield, <hi rend='italic'>Scribe.</hi>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n="371"/><anchor id="Pg371"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Iuly 15 <hi rend='italic'>Antemeridiem</hi>, Sess. 4.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act concerning Commissions from Burghs.</hi></head>

<p>
It is resolved by the Generall Assembly, untill the matter
concerning Commissioners from Burghs be further
thought upon, that in the mean time according to the ordinary
practice no Commission to the Generall Assembly be
admitted from Burghs, but such as shall be consented to,
and approven by the Ministry and Sessions thereof, the persons
elected being always Elders.
</p>

</div>
</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Iuly 18. 1648. <hi rend='italic'>Antemeridiem.</hi> Sess 6.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act concerning the examining of the proceedings
of the Commissioners of Assemblies.</hi></head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly renews and revives the Act of
the Assembly holden at <hi rend='italic'>Bruntiland Anno 1601.</hi> concerning
the examination of the proceedings of the Commission
of the Generall Assembly, tenour whereof follows. <hi rend='italic'>The
Assembly hath Ordained that in every Assembly to be conveened in all
time coming such as shall happen to be appointed Commissioners from
the Generall Assembly, to endure while the Assembly next thereafter,
shall give an account of their proceedings during the whole time of
their Commission in the beginning of the Assembly, before any other
cause or matter be handled and their proceedings to be allowed or disallowed
as the Assembly shall think expedient.</hi>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Iuly 18. 1648. <hi rend='italic'>Postmeridiem.</hi> Sess. 7.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Approbation of the proceedings of the Commission
of the preceeding Assembly,</hi></head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly having examined the proceedings
of the Commission of the preceeding Assembly, especially
their Declarations, Remonstrances, Representations,
<pb n="372"/><anchor id="Pg372"/>
Petitions, Vindication, and other Papers relating
to the present Engagement in War, Do unanimously finde
that in all their proceedings, they have been zealous,
diligent and Faithfull in discharge of the trust committed to
them; And therefore ratifie and approve the whole proceedings,
Acts and conclusions of the said Commission: and
particularly their Papers relating to the said Engagement,
and their judgement of the unlawfulnesse thereof, Appointing
Mr <hi rend='italic'>John Moncreiff</hi> Moderator
<hi rend='italic'>pro tempore</hi> to return them
hearty thanks in name of the Assembly for their great pains,
travells &amp; fidelity in matters of so great concernment to the
Cause of God and to this Kirk, admidst so great and many
difficulties.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>July 20. 1648. <hi rend='italic'>Postmeridiem,</hi> Sess. 10.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Approbation of the larger Catechisme.</hi></head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly having exactly examined and
seriously considered, the larger Catechisme agreed upon
by the Assembly of Divines sitting at <hi rend='italic'>Westminster</hi> with assistance
of Commissioners from this Kirk, Copies thereof
being Printed, and sent to Presbyteries for the more exact
tryall thereof, and publick intimation being frequently
made in this Assembly, that every one that had any doubts
or objections upon it, might put them in; Do finde upon
due examination thereof, That the said Catechisme is
agreeable to the Word of God, and in nothing contrary to
the received Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government
of this Kirk, a necessary part of the intended Uniformity
in Religion, and a rich treasure for increasing knowledge
among the People of God, and therefore the Assembly,
as they blesse the Lord that so excellent a Catechisme
is prepared, so they Approve the same as a part of Uniformity;
Agreeing for their part, that it be a common Catechisme
for the three Kingdoms, and a Directory for Catechising
such as have made some proficiency in the knowledge
of the grounds of Religion.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n="373"/><anchor id="Pg373"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>July 21. 1648. Antemeridiem,</hi> Sess. 11.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act against sudden admitting deposed Ministers
to particular Congregations.</hi></head>

<p>
The General Assembly considering the danger of sudden
receiving of deposed Ministers at this time when Malignancy
is likely to spread; Therefore finding it necessary
untill the ends of the Solemn League and Covenant be setled
and secured to restrain the suddenness of admitting deposed
Ministers to particular charges, Do Ordain that notwithstanding
any License to be granted for opening the mouths
of deposed Ministers yet they shall not be actually admitted
to any particular Congregations without consent of the Generall
Assembly, Declaring for such as have already their
mouths opened before the time, that if any calling to a
particular charge offer unto them before the next Assembly,
it shall be sufficient for them to have the consent of the
Commissioners of this Generall Assembly.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>July 25. 1648. <hi rend='italic'>Antemeridiem.</hi> Sess. 14.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>The Assemblies Answer to the Paper sent from
the Committee of Estates of the 24. July.</hi></head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly having considered the Paper of
the <hi rend='italic'>24. July</hi> delivered to them from the conference, and
having compared it with the other Paper of the 17. of <hi rend='italic'>July</hi>
presented from the Honourable Committee of Estates whereunto
it relates, and with the Declaration lately emitted
by the Committee to the Parliament and Kingdom of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>,
finde that it is supposed by their Lordships, that we
may be satisfied in point of the security of Religion according
to the Covenant; notwithstanding of the present engagement
in war; The Assembly do therefore in answer to the
said Paper declare,
<pb n="374"/><anchor id="Pg374"/>
That we see no possibility of securing Religion, as long as
this unlawfull Engagement is carried on, Religion being
thereby greatly endangered,
</p>

<p>
1. Because none of the just and necessary desires of the
Commission of the late General Assembly for securing Religion
have been granted or satisfied; More particularly it was
represented to the High and Honourable Court of Parliament,
that for securing of Religion, it was necessary that
the Popish, Prelaticall and Malignant party, be declared
Enemies to the Cause upon the one hand, as well as Sectaries
upon the other, and that all Associations, either in
Forces or Councels with the former as well as the latter be
avoided. That his Majesties Concessions and offers concerning
Religion, sent home from the Isle of <hi rend='italic'>Wight</hi>, be declared
by the Parliament to be unsatisfactory, That before his
Majesties restitution to the exercise of his Royall power assurance
be had from his Majesty by his solemn Oath under his
hand and Seal for settling Religion according to the Covenant,
That their Lordships should keep themselves from
owning any quarrel concerning his Majesties Negative voice,
That the managing of the publike affairs, might be intrusted
onely to such persons as have given constant proof of their
integrity, and against whom there is no just cause of exception
or jealousie, and that there might be no Engagement
without a solemn Oath, wherein the Kirk ought to hand
the same interest they had in the solemn League and Covenant;
All which are more particularly expressed in the Papers
given in by the Commission of the late Assembly to the
Parliament; notwithstanding the Engagement hath been
carried on without satisfaction to these and the like desires,
and so without giving security in the point of Religion, but
with great and manifest danger to the same.
</p>

<p>
2. As the happy Union of the Kingdoms, by the solemn
League and Covenant hath been justly looked upon as a speciall
means for preserving and strengthening the true Reformed
Religion in this Island, So it is no lesse weakened &amp;
hurt by endeavouring a breach between these Kingdoms;
Which howsoever disclaimed, is yet manifest from the reality
of the publike proceedings in this Engagement, and
<pb n="375"/><anchor id="Pg375"/>
namely from the neglect of endeavouring a Treaty between
the Kingdoms for preventing of War and bloodshed as was
earnestly desired, from their associating and joyning with
known Malignants and Incendiaries, and such as have been
declared Enemies to this Cause, from their entring the Kingdom
of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi> with an Army, upon the grounds of the Declaration
of the Parliament, which cannot but infer a National
quarrel against the Parliament and Kingdom of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, and
from their garrisoning the frontire Towns of that Kingdom.
</p>

<p>
3. The Engagement is carried on by such means and
ways, as tend to the destroying of Religion, by ensnaring
and forcing the consciences of the people of God with unlawfull
Bands and Oathes, and oppressing the Persons and
Estates of such as have been most active and zealous for Religion
and the Covenant. All which is strengthened and authorized
by Acts of Parliament, appointing that all that do
not obey, or perswade others not to obey the Resolutions
of Parliament and Committee anent this Engagement, or
who shall not subscribe the Act and Declaration of the 10.
<hi rend='italic'>June</hi>, 1648. imposed upon all the Subjects, shall be holden
as enemies to the Cause and to Religion, and have their
persons secured, and their Estates intromitted with.
</p>

<p>
4. The Engagement is carried on, not without great encroachments
upon the Liberties of the Kirk, as we are ready
to clear in many particulars.
</p>

<p>
Wherefore the security of Religion, and carrying on of
the present Engagement being inconsistent, We do propose
for the necessary security and safety of Religion, that
all the dangers thereof may be taken to consideration, and
amongst the rest the said Engagement as one of the greatest
which yet being established and authorized by Act of Parliament,
we leave it to their Lordships to think of what
remedies may be provided for redressing grievances which
flow from such Acts and Ordinances. This we are sure of,
the publike desires of the Kirk will abundantly witnesse
for us, that such things as were necessary for the security
of Religion, were in due season represented, &amp; yet not
granted by them that had greater power &amp; authority at that
time when it was much more easie to give satisfaction therein
<pb n="376"/><anchor id="Pg376"/>
then now; So that the blame cannot lye upon the General
Assembly or their Commissioners that Religion is not secured.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>July 28. 1648. <hi rend='italic'>Antemeridiem,</hi> Sess. 18.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act and Declaration against the Act of Parliament
&amp; Committee of Estates ordained to be subscribed
the 10. and 12. of June, and against all new Oathes
or Bands in the common Cause imposed without
consent of the Church.</hi></head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly taking to consideration a Declaration
and Act of Parliament, of the date 10. of <hi rend='italic'>June</hi>,
1648. highly concerning Religion, and the consciences of
the People of God in the Land, and one Act of the Committee
of Estates, of the date 12. of <hi rend='italic'>June</hi>, 1648. both published
in Print, whereby all Subjects are Ordained by subscription
to acknowledge as just, and oblige themselves to
adhere unto the said Act and Declaration, containing an
obligation upon their honours and credits, and as they desire
to be, and to be holden, as lovers of their Country,
Religion, Laws and Liberties, to joyn and concur with
their Persons and Estates in the assistance of the execution,
and observation of the Acts and Constitutions of this Parliament,
as the most fit and necessary remedies of the by-gone
and present evils and distractions of this Kirk and Kingdom,
and for the preservation of Religion, Laws and Liberties
and of his Majesties authority, with certification that such
as refuse or delay to subscribe the same, shall be holden as
Enemies and Opposites to the Common Cause, consisting
in the maintenance of the true reformed Religion, of the
Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom and of his Majesties authority.
Which subscription the Assembly cannot otherwise
look upon, then as a snare for the People of God to
involve them in guiltinesse, and to draw them from their
former Principles and Vows in the solemn League and Covenant.
For that subscription were an approving of some
Acts of Parliament, which they have never yet seen nor
<pb n="377"/><anchor id="Pg377"/>
known, they not being all published, were an agreeing to
Acts of Parliament, highly concerning Religion and the
Covenant, made not onely without, but expresly against the
advise of the Kirk, were an acknowledging of this present
Engagement in War, in all the means and ways for promoving
the same, to be the most fit and necessary remedies of
the by-gone and present evils, whereas so many Petitions to
the Parliament, from Committees of War, Synods, Presbyteries
and Paroches have made it appear, that they are no
way satisfied therewith in point of conscience; were an
ascribing of a power to the Parliament, to declare these to
be enemies to the true Religion, whom the Kirk hath not
declared to be such but rather friends; were an approving
of an Act made for the restraining the liberty of printing
from the Kirk, yea and of all the Acts of the Committee of
Estates, to be made in time coming, till <hi rend='italic'>March</hi> 1650. which
by Act of Parliament are ordained to be obeyed; were an
allowing of Acts for securing of the persons, and intrometting
with the Estates of such as themselves shall not obey, or
perswade others not to obey resolutions concerning this Engagement,
and for protecting persons under Kirk Censures,
and so an infringing and violating of the Liberties and Discipline
of the Kirk established by the Laws of the Land,
and sworn to in the Nationall Covenant to be defended,
under the pains contained in the Law of God, And in all
these, such as do subscribe, do binde themselves not only
to active obedience in their own persons, but to the urging
of active obedience upon all others, and so draw upon
themselves all the guiltinesse and sad consequences of the
present engagement; Yea, such as are Members of Parliament,
and have in the Oath of Parliament sworn not to Vote
or consent to any thing, but what to their best knowledge
is most expedient for Religion, Kirk and Kingdom, and
accordingly have reasoned against, and dissented from divers
Acts of this Parliament, These by the subscription of this
Act, cannot eschew the danger of perjury, in obliging
themselves to active obedience to these Acts, which according
to their Oath, they did judge unlawfull. Neither can
the 38. Act of the Parliament 1640. wherein such a kinde of
<pb n="378"/><anchor id="Pg378"/>
Band was enacted to be subscribed by any precedent or Warrant
for subscribing of this Act; For it plainly appears by the
narrative of that Act omitted in this Band, how great a difference
there is between the condition of affairs then &amp; now.
Then the Kings Commissioner had left and discharged the sitting
of the Parl. then the Parl. for sitting was declared Traitors,
and Armies in <hi rend='italic'>England</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi> prepared against them,
then not only the Act, but the very authority of Parliament
was called in question, then Kirk and State were united in
the Cause against the Malignant party, then nothing was
determined in Parliament in matters of Religion without,
much lesse against the advice of the Kirk; But beside that, it
was not thought expedient by the State, that that Band should
be pressed through the Kingdom. The case now not onely
differs from what was then, But is in many things just contrary,
as is evident to all who will compare the two together.
And therefore the Generall Assembly professing in all tender
respect to the high and Honourable Court of Parliament and
Committee of Estates, but finding a straiter tye of God lying
upon their Consciences, that they be not found unfaithfull
watchmen, and betrayers of the souls of these committed to
their charge, Do unanimously Declare the foresaid subscription
to be unlawfull and sinfull. And do warn, and In the
Name of the Lord Charge all the members of this Kirk, to
forbear the subscribing of the said Act and Declaration, much
more the urging of the subscription thereof, as they would
not incur the wrath of God, and the Censures of the Kirk.
And considering how necessary it is that according to the
desire of the Commissioners of the Assembly to the
Parliament, the Kirk might have the same interest in
any new Oathes in this Cause, as they had in the solemn
League and Covenant, and what dangers of contradictory
Oathes, perjuries and snares to mens consciences
may fall out otherwise: Therefore they likewise enjoyn
all the members of this Kirk, to forbear the swearing, subscribing
or pressing of any new Oathes or Bands in this Cause,
without advice and concurrence of the Kirk, especially
to in any way limit or
<pb n="379"/><anchor id="Pg379"/>
restrain them in the duties whereunto they are obliged, by
nationall or solemn League and Covenant, and that with
certification as aforesaid. And such as have already pressed
or subscribed the foresaid Act and Declaration, The Generall
Assembly doth hereby exhort them most earnestly in the
bowels of Christ, to repent of that their defection. And
Ordains that Presbyteries, or in case of their negligence,
or being overawed the provinciall Synods or the Commission
of the Assembly, which of them shall first occur, and
in case of the Synods negligence, that the said Commission
be carefull to proceed against, and censure the contraveeners
of the Act according to the quality and degree of their offences
as they will be answerable to the Generall Assembly;
and that therefore this Act be sent to Presbyteries to be
republished in the several Kirks of their bounds.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Eodem die Postmeridiem.</hi> Sess. 19.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Approbation of the shorter Catechisme.</hi></head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly having seriously considered
the shorter Catechisme, agreed upon by the Assembly
of Divines sitting at <hi rend='italic'>Westminster</hi>, with assistance
of Commissioners from this Kirk. Doe finde upon due examination
thereof, That the said Catechisme is agreeable
to the Word of God, and in nothing contrary to the received,
Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government
of this Kirk, And therefore Approve the said shorter Catechisme
as a part of the intended Uniformity, to be a Directory
for Catechising such as are of weaker capacitie.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="380"/><anchor id="Pg380"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act discharging a little Catechisme printed
at</hi> Edinburgh, 1647.</head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly having found in a little Catechisme,
printed at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, entituled, <hi rend='italic'>The
A. B. C. with the Catechisme, That is to say, an instruction
to be taught and learned of young children</hi>, very grosse errours
in the point of Universall Redemption, and in the number
of the Sacraments, Therefore doe discharge the venting
or selling of the said Catechisme of the foresaid impression,
or of whatsoever other impression the same be of, and all
use thereof in Schools or Families, Inhibiting also all Printers
to reprint the same, And recommends to Presbyteries
to take speciall care that this Act be obeyed.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Ult.</hi> Iuly 1648. <hi rend='italic'>Postmeridiem,</hi> Sess.
21.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>A Declaration of the Generall Assembly concerning
the present dangers of Religion, and especially
the unlawfull engagement in War, against the Kingdom
of</hi> England; <hi rend='italic'>Together, with many necessary exhortations
and directions to all the Members
of the Kirk of Scotland.</hi></head>

<p>
It cannot seem strange to any that considereth the great
trust that lyeth on us, comparing the same with the
eminent dangers wherewith the Cause of God is invironed
in this Land, if at this time We declare our sense
thereof, and warn the people of God from this watch-tower
of the present duties incombent to them; Our witnesse
is in heaven, and our record on high, that we doe not
this from any disrespect to the Parliament whom we have
honoured and will ever honour and also obey in all things
which are agreeable to the Word of God, to our Solemn
Covenants: And to the duties of our Callings, Not
<pb n="381"/><anchor id="Pg381"/>
from any disloyalty or undutifulnesse to the Kings Majestie
to whom we heartily wish, and to his posterity after him,
a happy Reigne over these Dominions, Nor from any factious
disposition or siding with this or that party whatsoever,
Nor from any contentious humour about light or small matters,
Nor from any favour to or complyance with Sectaries,
against whose cursed opinions and ungodly practises, we have
heretofore given ample testimony, and are still obliged by
Solemn Covenant to endeavour the extirpation of Heresie
and Schism; But from the Conscience or our duty when
the glory of God, the Kingdom of his Son, his Word,
Ordinances, Government, Covenant, Ministery, Consciences
of People, Peace and Liberties of the Kirk are incompassed
and almost overwhelmed with great and growing
dangers.
</p>

<p>
How freely and faithfully the servants of God of old have
rebuked sin in persons of all ranks, not sparing Kings, States
nor Kingdoms, the Scripture maketh it most plain to all
that looks thereon; Neither want we domestick examples,
if we look back a little upon the behaviour of our zealous
Ancestours in this Kirk, who not only in their Sermons severally
with great gravity and freedom reproved the sins of
the time, But more especially in the Kirk Judicatories plain
and downright dealing was most frequent and familiar, as
appears in the Assemblies holden in <hi rend='italic'>June</hi>
and in <hi rend='italic'>October</hi> 1582.
in <hi rend='italic'>October</hi> 1583. in <hi rend='italic'>May</hi>
1592. in <hi rend='italic'>May</hi> 1594. and in <hi rend='italic'>March</hi>
1595. And not only the Generall Assembly by themselves,
but also by their Commissioners faithfully and freely laboured
to oppose all the steps of defection; as at other times,
so in the yeer 1596. wherein four or five severall times they
gave most free admonitions to the King, Parliament and
Councell, with a Protestation at the last before God, that
they were free of their blood, and of whatsoever judgement
should fall upon the Realm, and that they durst not for
fear of committing High Treason against Jesus Christ the
onely Monarch of his Kirk, abstain any longer from fighting
against their proceedings with the spiritual armour granted
to them of God, and mighty in him for overthrowing
all these bulwarks set up against his Kingdom; And in their
<pb n="382"/><anchor id="Pg382"/>
Declaration then emitted to the Kingdom, they shew that
it was a main design to have the freedom of the Spirit of God
in the rebuke of Sin by the mouthe of his Servants restrained
and therefore they warne all Pastours of their duty in applying
Doctrine and free preaching. Like as the Assembly,
24. <hi rend='italic'>March</hi> 1596, reckons up amongst the corruptions of the
Ministery to be censured with deprivation, if continued in,
the not applying their Doctrine against the corruptions of
the time, which was renewed in our late Assembly at
<hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi> 1638. What hath been done since that Assembly is
in recent memory; and the Papers to that purpose have been
published in Print, and are in the hands of all, Therefore
being warranted by the Word of God, and encouraged by
the forementioned examples, as after exact examination,
we have approven the proceedings of the Commissioners of
the last Generall Assembly, and specially their Declarations,
Desires, Representatations, Remonstrances, Supplications,
Vindication and other Papers relating to the present
engagment in War, wherein they have given good proof of
their fidelity, wisdom and zeal in the cause of God, So we
finde our selves necessitate to make known unto all the People
of God in this Nation our sense concerning the dangers
and duties or this present time.
</p>

<p>
The cry of the insolencies of this present Army from almost
all the parts of this Kingdom, hath been so great that
it hath gone up to heaven, and if we should be silent, we
could not be reputed faithfull in the performance of our
duty. We do acknowledge that it is incident unto all Armies
to be subject unto some disorders, and the Ministers of
the Kingdom have not been deficient in former times to represent
the same as they come unto their knowledge, calling
for the redresse of them at their hands who had power: But
the Commissioners of this present Assembly from the severall
Provinces have exhibited great variety or abominable scandals
and heinous impieties and insolencies committed by
persons imployed in this service, whereof we think fitting
here to give you a touch.
</p>

<p>
As if liberty had been proclaimed to the lusts of lewd men,
These that have been imployed in very many places of Land
<pb n="383"/><anchor id="Pg383"/>
have used horrible extortion of Moneys at their pleasure,
and beside the taking of victuals as they would for their
own use, they have in severall places wilfully destroyed
the same, and have plundred many houses, taking all away
they could and destroying what they could not carry away; in
this great oppression &amp; spoil of goods as the sufferers were many
so choise hath been made of those who Petitioned the High
and Honourable Court of Parliament for satisfaction to their
Consciences before the Engagement, or who were known
to make conscience of the worship of God in their families,
on whom they might exercise their raging wrath and unsatiable
convetousnesse; Nor stayed their rage here, but as
though the war had been against God, publick Fasts have
not only been neglected, but profaned by riotous spending
and making merry, Divine Worship have been in many
parts disturbed, some Ministers and people impeded from
coming together, others scattered when they were met,
some taken out of Kirks in time of worship, others apprehended
at their coming out at the Kirk doors and carryed
away; Besides these Ministers in performing the worship of
God have been menaced, contradicted, not without blasphemous
Oathes, yea their persons in Pulpit assaulted, not
to speak of the spoiling of their goods, taking, beating,
carrying away their persons and detaining them for a time.
And finally that which excedes all the rest and is more immediately
and directly against God, there hath also been many
cruell mockings of his Worship, and horrid blasphemies;
And it is not to be marvelled that such insolencies have been
committed, since there hath been admitied upon this service
some Papists, some bloody Irish Rebels, some non Covenanters,
and very many fugitives from Kirk Discipline,
Finally, even those who have been upon the late Rebellion,
and these not onely common Souldiers but Commanders, beside
many voluntiers who have no speciall command &amp; trust.
</p>

<p>
Besides all these, the Liberties of the Kirk have been grievously
encroached upon; 1. By emitting Declarations from
the Parliament and Committee of Estates, containing
severall things highly concerning Religion without the advice
or consent of the Generall Assembly or their Commissioners,
<pb n="384"/><anchor id="Pg384"/>
which was a ground of protestation to divers Members
of Parliament who have been most zealous and active in
the Cause. 2. The Article of Religion as expressed in the
Declaration of Parliament hath in it many dangerous expressions,
which are particularly instanced in the Representation
of the Commissioners of the Generall Assembly; And the
same Article of Religion in the late Declaration of the
Committee of Estates to <hi rend='italic'>England</hi> is more unsatisfactory then
the former: Like as in the said late Declaration there is a
totall omission of some most materiall things pretended to in
the Declaration of Parliament as satisfactory in point of securing
Religion, <hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi> the clause concerning security to be
had from his Majesty by his solemn Oath under his hand and
Seal, that he shall for himself and his Successors give his
Royall assent, and agree to such Act or Acts of Parliament,
and Bills as shall be presented to him by his Parliaments of
both and either Kingdoms respectively for enjoyning Presbyteriall
Government, Directory of Worship and Confession
of Faith in all his Majesties Dominions, and that his
Majestie shall never make opposition to any of those, nor
endeavour any change thereof; also the clause against association
with any that refuse to take the Covenant is omitted:
From all which it may appear in how great danger the liberties
of the Kirk and even Religion it self are left. 3. In the
close of the Declaration of Parliament, there is a new and
unsound glosse put upon the Covenant and Acts of General
Assembly, contrary to the sense of the General Assembly
itself, as is more fully expressed in the Representation of
the late Commission. 4. No redresse by the Parliament of
certain injuries complained of to their Lordships by the
Commissioners of the preceeding Generall Assembly.
5. Endeavours to weaken and frustrate Kirk-Censures by
making provisions for securing the stipends of such as shall
be censured for their concurring in, or preaching for this
present Engagement. 6. A misrepresentation of the proceedings
of the Commission of the Generall Assembly by
the Parliaments Letter of <hi rend='italic'>May</hi> 11. to the severall Presbyteries,
endeavouring to incense them against the Commission
of the late Assembly and to pre-ocupie their Commissioners
<pb n="385"/><anchor id="Pg385"/>
to this Assembly. 7. Whereas there were many
Petitions presented to the High and Honourable Court
of Parliament from the Commissioners of the General Assembly,
Synods &amp; Presbyteries against the present Engagement
as stated in the Parliaments Declaration, yet notwithstanding
of the said Petitions, and notwithstanding of many
free &amp; frequent warnings given by faithful Ministers in their
Sermons, notwithstanding also that it was not unknown
how much the generality of the wel affected in the Kingdom
were unsatisfied in their consciences with the grounds and
way of the said Engagement, yet good people are not onely
left unsatisfied in their and our desires, but compelled and
forced either to sin against their consciences or to be under
heavy pressures &amp; burdens. 8. Yea in the late Band injoyned
to be subscribed by all the Subjects of this Kingdom, men are
put to it to joyn and concur with their Persons &amp; Estates, in
the advancement, furtherance and assistance of the execution
obedience &amp; observation of the Acts and constitutions of the
late Parliament; &amp; consequently, as many as think the Engagement
unlawful shall bind themselves not onely for their
own part against their consciences, but to inforce the same
upon others who refuse, and so not onely be oppressed,
but turn oppressours of others. 9. This all the subjects
are required by the Act and Declaration of Parliament to
subscribe, as they desire to be holden true lovers of Religion;
It being further affirmed in the said Act and Declaration,
that the Acts and Constitutions of the late Parliament,
are the most fit and necessary remedies for preservation
of Religion; Where the Parliament assume to themselves,
without the advice and consent of the Assemblies
of the Kirk, to judge and determine such things wherein,
(if in any thing) the ecclesiastical Assemblies have undoubtedly
a special interest, <hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi> who are to be holden lovers
of Religion, and what are the most fit and necessary
remedies for preservation of Religion: Yea it is ordained
by the fourth Act of Parliament, 1640. that for preservation
of Religion, G. Assemblies rightly constitute, as the
proper &amp; competent judge of all matters Ecclesiastical, be
keeped yearly and oftner <hi rend='italic'>pro re nata</hi>. The Coronation Oath
<pb n="386"/><anchor id="Pg386"/>
doth also suppose the antecedent Judgement of the Kirk, as
the proper and competent judge who are enemies to true
Religion &amp; who not; for his Majesty obliged himself by that
Oath, that he should be carefull to root out all Hereticks
and enemies to the true Worship of God, who shall be
convict by the true Kirk of God, of the aforesaid crimes.
10. The General Assembly and their Commissioners are now
deprived of their liberty of Printing, confirmed and ratified
by Act of Parliament, there being an inhibition to the contrary
upon the PRINTER, under the pain of Death
by the Committee of Estates.
</p>

<p>
Whereas the desires of the Commissioners of the last Assembly,
for the safety and security of Religion, and the
right manner of proceeding to war, together with the supplications
of Provinciall Assemblies and Presbyteries, all
tending to the composing of the present unhappy differences,
and to the begetting of a right understanding, have
not produced the desired and wished-for effect; but on the
contrary our just grievances being still more and more
heightned, iniquity established by a law; and that law put
in execution; We cannot chuse but declare and give warning
to all the people of GOD in this land, concerning the
sinfulnesse and unlawfulnesse of the present Engagement:
which may be demonstrate by many reasons, as namely.
</p>

<p>
1. The Wars of GODS people, are called the Wars of
the LORD, <hi rend='italic'>Numb.</hi> 21,
14. 2 <hi rend='italic'>Chron</hi> 20. 15. and if our
eating and drinking, much more our engaging in war must
be for God and for his glory; 1 <hi rend='italic'>Cor.</hi> 10. 31. whatsoever we
do in word or deed, we are commanded to do all in the name
of the Lord Jesus, and so for his glory, <hi rend='italic'>Col.</hi> 3. 17. The
Kingdom of GOD and the righteousnesse thereof is to
be sought in the first place and before all other things,
<hi rend='italic'>Matth.</hi> 6. 33. It was the best flower and garland in the
former expeditions of this Nation, that they were for God
and for Religion principally and mainly. But if the principal
end of this present Engagement were for the glory of
GOD, How comes it to passe that not so much as one of the
desires of the Kirk, for the safety and security of Religion in
the said Engagement, is to this day satisfied or granted; But
<pb n="387"/><anchor id="Pg387"/>
on the contrary such courses taken as are destructive to Religion.
And if Gods glory be intended what meaneth the
employing and protecting in this Army so many blasphemers
persecutors of Piety, disturbers of divine worship, and
others guilty of notorious and crying sins. Again, how
can it be pretended that the good of Religion is principally
aimed at, when it is proposed and declared that the Kings
Majestie shall be brought to some of his houses in or near <hi rend='italic'>London</hi>,
with Honour, Freedom and Safety, before ever
there be any security had from him, or so much as any application
made to him for the good of Religion. What is
this but to postpone the honour of God, the liberties of the
Gospel, the safety of Gods people to an humane interest,
and to leave Religion in a condition of uncertainty, unsetlednesse
and hazard, while it is strongly endeavoured to settle
and make sure somewhat else.
</p>

<p>
2. Suppose the ends of this Engagement to be good
(which they are not) yet the meanes and ways of prosecution
are unlawfull, because there is no ane equall avoiding
of rocks on both hands, but a joyning with malignants to
suppresse Sectaries, a joyning hands with a black devill to
beat a white devil; They are bad Physicians who would so
cure one disease as to breed another as evil; or worse. That
there is in the present Engagement a confederacy and association
in war with such of the <hi rend='italic'>English</hi> who according to the
solemn League and Covenant and Declarations of both
Kingdoms, 1643. can be no otherwise looked upon but
as Malignants and enemies of Reformation and the Cause
of God, is now made so manifest before Sun and Moon,
that we suppose none will deny it; And tis no lesse undeniable,
that not only many known Malignants, but diverse
who joyned in the late rebellion within this Kingdom are
employed, yea, put into places of trust; All which how contrary
tis to the Word of God, no man can be ignorant who
will attentively search the Scriptures, for we finde therein
condemned confederacies and associations with the enemies
of true Religion, whether <hi rend='italic'>Canaanites</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Exod.</hi> 23. 32. and 24. 12. 15.
<hi rend='italic'>Deut.</hi> 7. 2. or other heathens 1 <hi rend='italic'>King</hi>
11. <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> 1, 2. such was <hi rend='italic'>Asa</hi>
his Covenant with <hi rend='italic'>Benhadad</hi>,
<pb n="388"/><anchor id="Pg388"/>
2 <hi rend='italic'>Chron.</hi> 16. to v. 10.
<hi rend='italic'>Ahaz</hi> his confederacy with the King
of <hi rend='italic'>Assyria</hi> 2 <hi rend='italic'>King.</hi>
16. 7. 10. 2 <hi rend='italic'>Chron.</hi> 28. 16. to v. 23. or whither
the association was with wicked men of the seed of
<hi rend='italic'>Abraham</hi>, as <hi rend='italic'>Jehoshaphats</hi>
with <hi rend='italic'>Achab</hi> 2 <hi rend='italic'>Chron.</hi>
18. 2. compared with chap. 19. 2. also his association with
<hi rend='italic'>Ahaziah</hi> 2 <hi rend='italic'>Chron</hi>, 20. 35.
and <hi rend='italic'>Amaziachs</hi> associating to himself 100000.
of the ten Tribes when GOD was not with them, 2 <hi rend='italic'>Chron.</hi>
25. 7, 8, 9, 10. The sin and danger of such associations
may further appear from <hi rend='italic'>Isaiah</hi> 8. 12. 15.
<hi rend='italic'>Jer.</hi>. 2. 18. <hi rend='italic'>Psal.</hi>
106. 35. <hi rend='italic'>Hos.</hi> 5. 13. and 7. 8,
11. <hi rend='italic'>Cor.</hi> 6. 14, 15. and if
we should esteem Gods enemies, to be our enemies and hate
them with perfect hatred, <hi rend='italic'>Psal.</hi> 139. 21 how can we then joyn
with them as confederates and associates, especially in a
cause where Religion is so highly concerned; and seeing
they have been formerly in actuall opposition to the same
cause.
</p>

<p>
3. We are commanded if it be possible and as much as
lieth in us to have peace with all men, <hi rend='italic'>Rom.</hi> 12. 18, to seek
peace and pursue it, <hi rend='italic'>Psal.</hi> 34. 14. war and bloodshed is the
last remedy after all the wayes and means of peace have been
used in vain. The intended war of the nine Tribes and a
half against the two Tribes and half was prevented by a
Message and Treaty of Peace <hi rend='italic'>Josh.</hi> 22; The like means
was used by <hi rend='italic'>Jepthah</hi> (though not with the like success)
for the preventing of war with the King of
<hi rend='italic'>Ammon</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Judg.</hi> 11.
The very light of nature hath taught Heathens not to make
war till first all amicable wayes of preventing bloodshed
were tried; yet this war hath been driven on without observing
any such method of proceeding except by a message
wherein not so much as one breach was represented. Yea
though these two Kingdoms are straitly united in Covenant,
yet these who have carried on this war did not only neglect
to desire a Treaty, but also slight an offer of a Treaty made
from the Parliament of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi> upon the Propositions of
both Kingdoms.
</p>

<p>
4. There are many clear and ful testimonies of Scriptures
against the breach and violation of Covenants, although
but between man and man, <hi rend='italic'>Psal.</hi>
55. 20. <hi rend='italic'>Rom.</hi> 1, 31.
<pb n="389"/><anchor id="Pg389"/>
2 <hi rend='italic'>Tim.</hi> 3. 3, Especially where the name of God was interposed
in Covenants by any of his people, <hi rend='italic'>Jer.</hi> 34. 8, 10,
11, 18. <hi rend='italic'>Ezek.</hi> 17. 18. 19. How much more the violation of
a Solemn Covenant between God and his people. <hi rend='italic'>Lev.</hi> 26.
15. 25. <hi rend='italic'>Deut.</hi> 17. 2. and 29. 21, 14,
25. <hi rend='italic'>Jer.</hi> 22. 8, 9. 1 <hi rend='italic'>King.</hi>
19. 10. <hi rend='italic'>Dan.</hi> 11. 32. <hi rend='italic'>Hos.</hi> 6. 7. If
therefore the present Engagement be a breach of our solemn League and Covenant,
then they who have before taken the Covenant,
and have now joyned in this Engagement, must grant by
necessary and infailible consequence, either that the Covenant
it self which they took was unlawful, and such as they
cannot perform without sin (which yet they cannot professe)
or otherwise, that the Engagement is unlawfull and
sinfull, as being a breach of Covenant, and so contrary to
the Word of God; that the present Engagement is a breach
of Covenant may appear by comparing it with each of the
Articles, for it is against all the six Articles of the Covenant.
</p>

<p>
Against the first, because in stead of the preservation of
the Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government of this
Kirk; there is not onely a great quarelling by those that do
Engage, at the present doctrine, and free preaching, a
disturbing of and withdrawing from the Worship, and namely
from the late solemn humiliation: But also a refusall
of such things as were desired by the Commission of the
late Assembly and Provincial Synods, as necessary to the preservation
of the true Reformed Religion: And we have just
cause of fear that the Reformation of Religion in Doctrine,
Worship, Discipline and Government is not intended
to be sufficiently maintained and preserved, when we
finde such a limitation and restriction in the late Declaration
of the Committee of Estates to the Parliament and Kingdom
of <hi rend='italic'>England, That they will maintain and preserve the
Reformation of Religion, Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government,
as is by the mercy of GOD, and his Majesties goodnesse
established by Law among us</hi>; but as there is no such
limitation in the Covenant, so we have not had such proof
of his Majesties goodnesse as to establish by Law all that
hath been by the mercies of God inacted in Generall
Assemblies. As to the rest of the first Article, concerning
<pb n="390"/><anchor id="Pg390"/>
the Reformation of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>
and <hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi>, and the Uniformity,
as there was some hopefull beginnings thereof, and
a good foundation laid, during the late War against the Popish
Prelaticall and Malignant party, so the state and ground
of the War being now altered, and these chosen for confederates,
and associates in the War, who are known enemies
to that Reformation, and Uniformity, how can the Covenant
be keeped in that point as long as such a War is carried
on.
</p>

<p>
The second Article is violated because in stead of indeavouring
to extirpate Popery and Superstition without respect
of persons (as is exprest in the Covenant) there is in the
late Declaration of the Committee of Estates a desire of the
Queens return, without any condition tending to the restraint
of her Masse or exercise of Popery; We do also conceive
there is a tacit condescending to the toleration of Superstition
and the Book of Common prayer in His Majesties
family, because as it was reserved by himself in his concession,
brought home by the Commissioners of this Kingdom,
So these concessions were never plainly declared by the Parliament
to be unsatisfactory to their Lordships, howbeit it
hath been often and earnestly desired: neither can we conceive
how the clause concerning the extirpation of Prelacy,
can consist with indeavouring to bring His Majesty with
Honour, Freedom and Safety to one of his Houses in or
about LONDON, without any security had from him,
for the abolition of Prelacy; it being his known principle
(and publickly declared by himself shortly after he
went to the Isle of <hi rend='italic'>Wight</hi>) that he holds himself obliged
in conscience, and by his Coronation Oath to maintain
Archbishops, Bishops, &amp;c. Can it be said that they are endeavouring
to extirpate Prelacy, who after such a Declaration
would put in His Majesties hand an opportunity to restore
it?
</p>

<p>
As for the third Article we cannot conceive how the preserving
of the Priviledges of Parliament, and asserting the
Kings negative voice can consist; And we are sorrowfull
that under the colour, of the Priviledges of Parliament,
the liberties of the Subjects are overthrown, and the persons
<pb n="391"/><anchor id="Pg391"/>
and Estates of such as have been best affected to the Cause and
Covenant are exposed to most grievous injuries, crying oppressions:
And whereas the duty in preserving and defending
his Majesties Person and Authority, is by the third
Article of the Covenant qualified with, and subordinate
unto the preservation and defence of the true Religion and
Liberties of the Kingdoms, There is no such qualification,
nor subordination observed in the present Engagement, but
on the contrary, it is so carried on, as to make duties to
God and Religion conditionall, qualified, limited; and
duties to the King absolute and unlimited.
</p>

<p>
The fourth Article of the Covenant is so foully broken,
that they who were by that Article declared Enemies, Incendiaries,
Malignants, and therefore to be brought to
condigne tryall and punishment, are now looked upon as
friends and associates, and are the men who get most favour
and protection, and sundry of them imployed in places
of trust, in the Army and Committees.
</p>

<p>
For the fifth Article, instead of endeavouring to preserve
Peace and Union, a breach is endeavoured between the
Kingdoms, not only by taking in and garrisoning their
frontire Towns, but also entering the Kingdom of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>
with an Army, and joyning with the common enemies of
both Kingdoms, notwithstanding of an offer of a Treaty
upon the Propositions of both Kingdoms made by the Parliament
of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi> to the Parliament of this Kingdom. And
whether the way of this Engagement can consist with the
large Treaty between the Kingdoms, we shall with the Honourable
Committee of Estates may yet take it into their
serious second thoughts.
</p>

<p>
The sixth is also manifestly broken, for we are thereby
obliged to assist and defend all those that entered into this
League and Covenant, in maintaining and pursuing thereof:
Whereas the Army now entered into <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, is
to assist and defend many who have not entered into that League
and Covenant: And for those who took the Covenant
in that Nation. and continue faithfull in it, what they may
expect from this Army, may be collected not onely from
their carriage towards their Brethren at home; but also
<pb n="392"/><anchor id="Pg392"/>
from that clause toward the close of the late Declaration of
the Committee of Estates, <hi rend='italic'>And that we will do prejudice or use
violence to none (as far as we are able) but to such as oppose us, or
such ends above mentioned.</hi> It cannot be unknown that many
of the English Nation who are firm and faithfull to the Covenant,
and Presbyteriall Government do, and will according
to their places and callings oppose some of those ends
above mentioned in that Declaration, as namely, the restoring
both of King and Queen without any condition
or security first had from them; And so by that rule in the
Declaration they must expect to be used as enemies, not
as friends. That sixth Article is also broken by a departing
from the first principles and resolutions: and by dividing,
and withdrawing from those that adhere thereunto, which
hath been before cleared by the Commission of the late Generall
Assembly in their Declaration in <hi rend='italic'>March</hi>, Representation,
and other Papers published in Print.
</p>

<p>
5. We leave it to be seriously pondered by every one who
is truely conscientious, whether it be any ways credible
or probable, or agreeable to Scripture rules, that the generality
of all that have been most faithfull and cordiall to the
Covenant and cause of God should be deceived, deluded
and darkened in this businesse, and that they who for the
most part were enemies to the work of God in the beginning,
and have never brought forth fruits meet for Repentance,
should now finde out the will of God more than his
most faithfull Servants in the Land, and who, that fears
God, will believe that Malignants are for the ends of the
Covenant and that they who are most instrumental in the
Reformation, are against the ends of the Covenant.
</p>

<p>
All which considered, as we could not, without involving
our selves in the guiltinesse of so unlawfull an Engagement,
yeeld to the desire of the Army for Ministers to be
sent by us to attend them; So we do earnestly exhort, and
in the name and authority of Jesus Christ, charge and require
all and every one of the Members of this Reformed
Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Scotland</hi>.
</p>

<p>
I. That they search narrowly into the sins which have
Procured so great judgements and so sad an interruption
<pb n="393"/><anchor id="Pg393"/>
of the work of God, that they examine themselves, consider
their wayes, be much in humiliation and prayer, study
a reall and practicall Reformation, That they also mourn
and sigh for the abominations of the Land, and stand in
the gap to turn away the wrath, Among all these fearfull
sins, the violation of the Solemn League and Covenant,
would not be forgotten but seriously laid to heart, as that
which eminently provoketh the Lord and procureth his
judgements to be powred forth not onely upon persons and
families, but also upon States and Kingdoms. Covenant-breakers
through in common things, are reckoned by
the Apostle in that Catalogue of the abominations of the
Gentiles: But among the people of God, where his great
name is interposed, the breach of Covenant even in meaner
matters, such as the setting of servants at liberty provoketh
the Lord to say, <hi rend='italic'>Behold I proclaim a liberty for you (saith
the Lord) to the sword, to the pestilence, and to the famine, and
I will give the men that hath transgressed my Covenant,</hi> and
(not excepting, but expressly mentioning Princes) he
addes, <hi rend='italic'>I will give them into the hands of their enemies,</hi> The
History of the <hi rend='italic'>Gibeonites</hi>, who surreptitiously procured the
Covenant made to spare them, and whom <hi rend='italic'>Saul</hi> some ages thereafter
in his zeal to the children of <hi rend='italic'>Israel</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Judah</hi> sought to
slay, as being cursed <hi rend='italic'>Canaanites</hi>, evidenceth with what
vengeance, the LORD followeth Covenant-breakers,
whereof there wants not in prophane History also both forreign
and domestick examples: Therefore let all the inhabytants
of the Land of whatsoever rank, seriously ponder how
terrible judgements the violation of a Covenant so recently,
so advisedly, so solemnly made, and in so weighty matters,
may draw on, if not timously prevented by speedy repentance.
</p>

<p>
II. That they so respect and honour Authority, as that
they be not the servants of men, nor give obedience to the
will and authority of Rulers in any thing which may not
consist with the word of God, but stand fast in the liberty
wherewith Christ hath made them free, and obey God rather
then men.
</p>

<p>
III. That they carefully avoid the dangerous rocks and
snares of this time, whereby so many are taken and broken.
<pb n="394"/><anchor id="Pg394"/>
Upon the one hand the sowre leaven of Malignancy where
ever it enters, spoileth and corrupteth the whole lump, postponing
Religion, and the Cause of God to humane interest,
what ever be pretended to the contrary, and obstructing
the work of Reformation, and propagation of Religion out
of false respects and creature interest. As this hath formerly
abounded in the land, to the prejudice of the Cause and
Work of God, so of late it is revived, spreading with specious
pretences of vindicating wrongs done to his Majesty.
We desire not to be mistaken, as if respect and love to his
Majesty were branded with the infamous mark of Malignancy;
But hereby we warn all who would not come under
this soul stain, not onely in their speech and profession,
but really &amp; in their whole carriage not to prefer their own,
and the interest of any creature whatsoever, before the
interest of CHRIST and Religion. The characters of
these have been fully given in former Declarations, specially
in the Declaration of the Commissioners of the Generall Assembly
in <hi rend='italic'>March</hi> last, which we hold as here repeated;
onely adding this, that they ordinarily traduce Kirk Judicatures,
as medling with civill affairs, which as it is no
new calumny, but such as hath been cast upon the servants
of GOD in former times; so the whole course of proceedings
doth manifestly confute the same.
</p>

<p>
Upon the other hand Sectarisme hath no lesse hindered
the blessed and glorious work of Reformation in our neighbour
Kingdom, against the venome whereof, lest it approach
and infect this Kirk, we have need to watch diligently
to avoid all the beginnings and dangerous appearances thereof.
The many faithfull testimonies from godly Ministers
in severall parts of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, against the vile errours, and
abominable blasphemies abounding there, as they are to us
matter of rejoicing before the Lord; so they ought to be looked
on as warnings to all sorts of people, especially that regard
Religion, to beware of Sathans snares, craftily set to
catch their souls. And because such gangreens creep insensibly,
all that love the Honour of GOD, and welfare of
Religion, would seriously consider the following points,
<pb n="395"/><anchor id="Pg395"/>
both by way of marks to discern; and meanes to escape the
danger of this infection.
</p>

<p>
1. Whosoever are misprises of the blessed work of Reformation
established within this Land, and do not shew
themselves grieved for the impediments and obstructions
it hath met with in our neighbour Kingdom, these are
even on the brink of this precipice, ready to tumble down
in this gulf whensoever occasion is offered: All therefore
that love the Lord Jesus, would stir up their hearts in the
light and strength of the Lord highly to prize, and thankfully
to acknowledge what the right hand of the most High
hath done among us, as also to thirst fervently after the advancing
and perfecting of the LORD's work among our
neighbours.
</p>

<p>
2. Disrespect to the publick Ministery and Ordinances is
a symptome of a dangerous inclination to that disease: And
therefore as all Christs Ministers ought to stir up themselves,
to walk as becometh their high and holy calling lest they be
stumbling blocks to the people of God; so all the people of
God ought most carefully to stir up themselves unto a precious
estimation of the Ordinances of God, &amp; highly to esteem
the Stewards thereof for their works sake. A duty at all times
needful but now especially, when Sathan by all means endevours
the contrary.
</p>

<p>
3. Indifferency in points of Religien, and pleading for
Toleration to themselves or others how far soever different
among themselves, is not to be forgotten among the characters
of Sectaries, and therefore ought the more carefully to be
avoided and opposed by all who desire to hold fast the profession
of their faith without wavering.
</p>

<p>
4. They who are glorying in, and seeking after new lights,
or under the pretext of them are self-conceited in singular opinions,
or who affect new and strange expressions, are entring
into the snare ready to be carried about with every
winde of Doctrine. And therefore albeit we ought always as
Disciples of the Lord to set ourselves as in his sight to be
taught by his Spirit according to his Word, yet in this time so
fertil of errours; it becommeth all the lovers of truth to hold
fast what they have received, that no man take their Crown.
</p>

<pb n="396"/><anchor id="Pg396"/>

<p>
5. Whosoever brings in any opinion or practise in this
Kirk contrary to the confession of Faith, Directory of Worship
or Presbyterian Government may be justly esteemed to
be opening the door to Schisme and Sects: And therefore
all depravers or misconstructers of the proceedings of Kirk-Judicatories,
especially the Generall Assembly would take
heed least by making a breach upon the walls of <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>
they make a patent way for Sectaries to enter.
</p>

<p>
6. They who separate the Spirit from the Word, and
pretend the Spirit, when they have no ground or warrant
from the Word, are already taken in an evill snare, And
therefore tis necessary to try the Spirits whither they are of
God, for many false Prophets are gone out into the world,
if they speak not according to the word it is because there is
no light in them.
</p>

<p>
Besides the former, these are also marks of a Sectary; If
any commend, and recommend to others, or spread and divulge
the erroneous books of Sectaries, If any allow, avow,
or use Conventicles or private meetings forbidden by the
Acts of the Generall Assembly 1641. and 1647. last past,
If any be unwilling, and decline to reckon Sectaries among
the enemies of the Covenant, from whom danger is to be
apprehended, And (though we disallow the abusing and
Idolizing of learning to the patrocinie of Errour or prejudice
of piety) if any contemn literature as needlesse at best,
if not also hurtfull to a Minister.
</p>

<p>
When we thus expreste our selves for preventing the
dangers of Sects and Schismes, it is far from our intention
to discourage any from the duties of piety, and mutuall
edification, according to the directions of the last Assembly
published in Print, and seriously recommended by them,
or to give any advantage to Malignants and Prophane persons,
with whom it is frequent to cast upon all those who
adhere to former principles, and cannot approve the present
Engagement, the odious nick-names of Sectaries and Independents.
For the beter discovery of such prophane mockers,
we give these markes and characters. 1. They do prophanely
and tauntingly abuse the name of the Spirit, under
that name deriding the work of Grace and sanctification.
<pb n="397"/><anchor id="Pg397"/>
2. They esteem and speak of exercises of conscience, as
fancies, or fits of melancholy. 3. They mock at Family-worship
and the means of mutuall edification so much recommended
by the last Assembly in their directions. 4. They
do usually calumniate godly Ministers, and professors who
follow holinesse, with the names of Sectaries, or the like
odious names, without any just cause: As we account all
such to be enemies to the practise and power of godlinesse;
So we do exhort all the lovers of truth to hold on in the way
of holinesse through good report and ill report, being stedfast,
immovable, alwayes abounding in the work of the
Lord, forasmuch as they know their labour is not in vain in
the Lord.
</p>

<p>
IV. That they do not concur in, nor any way assist this
present Engagement, as they would not partake in other
mens sins, and so receive of their plagues, but that by the
grace and assistance of Christ they stedfastly resolve to suffer
the rod of the wicked, and the utmost which wicked mens
malice can afflict them with, rather then to put forth their
hand to iniquity.
</p>

<p>
V. That they suffer not themselves to be abused with fair
pretences and professions usuall in the mouths of those that
carry on this designe, and often published in their Papers,
But remember that the foulest actions have not wanted
specious pretences; And if they who killed the Apostles
did both pretend and intend to do God good service, what
marvell that they who engage against the Covenant pretend
to engage for it. Neither is it to be forgotten, That
after the first subscription of our Nationall Covenant, these
who had the chief hand in managing publick affairs, and had
subscribed the Covenant, especially the Duke of <hi rend='italic'>Lenox</hi>,
and Captain James then Earl of <hi rend='italic'>Arran</hi>, in the years 1581,
1582, 1583, 1584. when their designe was to subvert both
the Doctrine and Discipline of this Kirk, yet gave great
assurances by promises and Oaths to the contrary. At
the Assemblies 1598, 1599, 1600. It was declared with
many vows and attestations by the King, Statesmen, and
these Ministers who were aspiring to Prelacy, That
they intended no such thing as a change of the Government
<pb n="398"/><anchor id="Pg398"/>
of the Kirk, or an introducing of Episcopacy, yet they
were really doing what they disclaimed and professed not to
do. And suppose that some who have an active hand in carrying
on the present publick affairs, have no design either
to destroy Religion, or utterly to sleight it: yet the way
they are on, and work they are about as it is contrived,
doth of its self, and in its own nature tend to the endangering,
if not to the utter subversion of Religion, for it cannot
be denyed, but the very undertaking of this War, sets
the once suppressed Malignants on work again, and successe
therein puts them in a capacity to set up according to their
principles abolished and abjured corruptions; which will
be the more hardly hindered, considering his Majesties propension,
and professed resolution that way, Especially seeing
His Majesties concessions (though it hath been often
desired) have never been plainly declared unsatisfactore by
the Parliament. And who in reason can think that any more
then His Majesties concessions sent from the Isle of <hi rend='italic'>Wight</hi>
will be required of him, by them who thereupon have proceeded
to this Engagement. The Kings negative voice (asserted
in the Papers of the Commissioners of this Kingdom
unto <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, which are owned in the late Declaration to the
Kingdom of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, as the sense of this Kingdom) considered
in relation to Religion makes the danger yet the greater
and more palpable, yea, may reach further to shake
and unsettle Religion established in this Land; If to the premises
this be added which is not only often declared, but
also demanded, That his Majestie be brought to one of his
houses in Honour, Freedom and Safety, which may infer the
admitting of his Maj. to the free exercise of his Royall power
before security had from him for Reeligion, or Application
made to him for the same, who sees not now what hazard Religion
runs, certainly greater then a good intention can salve,
</p>

<p>
VI. That they do not mistake, or misunderstand the nature
of the true Reformed Religion and of the Government
of JESUS CHRIST, as if thereby either the Prerogative
of Kings, Privileges of Parliaments or Liberties of
Burghs, and other Corporations were any wayes hurt or
weakened: whereas indeed Religion is the main pillar and
<pb n="399"/><anchor id="Pg399"/>
upholder of civill authority, or Magistracie, and it is the
resisting, and not the receiving of the Government of
CHRIST, which hath overturned civill powers. If the
Throne be established by righteousnesse (as we are plainly
taught by the Word of God) then it is overthrowne by unrighteousnesse
and iniquity.
</p>

<p>
VII. That they beware of all things which may ensnare
their consciences, as evill councell, evill company,
false informations, rash promises, and especially that they
beware of taking any Oathes, subscribing any Bonds, which
may relate to the Covenant and Cause of God, unlesse such
Oaths or Bonds be approved by the General Assembly or
their Commissioners for the publique affairs of the Kirk.
</p>

<p>
VIII. That they do not cast away their confidence, nor
sink into despair, because of the present dangers and difficulties,
but live by faith, waite for better times, and continue
stedfast as seeing him who is invisible, firmly beleeving
that such a course as is not of God but against him, will come
to naught.
</p>

<p>
IX. To remember, that as the violation of the Covenant
by some in <hi rend='italic'>England</hi> doth not set us free from the observation
thereof, and as no laws nor authority on earth can
absolve us from so solemn an obligation to the most High
God (which not onely hath been professed by this Kirk
but in a Petition of the City of <hi rend='italic'>London</hi>, and in publique
Testimonies of many of the Ministery of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>). So we are
not acquited and assoiled from the obligation of our solemn
Covenant, because of the troubles and confusions of the times;
But that in the worst of times all those duties, whereunto
by Covenant we oblige ourselves, do still lie upon us,
for we have sworn (and must perform it) concerning that
Cause and Covenant wherein we solemnly Engaged, <hi rend='italic'>That
we shall all the dayes of our lives zealously and constantly continue
therein against all opposition, and promove the same according to our
power against all lets and Impediments whatsoever.</hi> And if against
all lets and impediments whatsoever, then the altering of
the way of opposition, or of the kinde of impediments doth
not alter the nature, or the Joye of the Covenant, but we are
obliged to all the duties therein contained.
</p>

<pb n="400"/><anchor id="Pg400"/>

<p>
We doe also exhort and charge in CHRISTS Name
the Prince of Pastors, all the Ministers within this Kirk,
that in no wayes they be accessary to this sinful Engagement,
but in all their conferences and reasoning especially, in
their publick Doctrine, they declare themselves freely, and
faithfully, as they would eschew the wrath of GOD, due
for a violated Covenant, and as they would escape the censures
of the Kirk; and let all Presbyteries be watchful within
their bounds, and carefully, wisely, and zealously to inflict
Ecclesiastick censures.
</p>

<p>
Finally, we exhort all civil Iudicatories, and every one
intrusted with power to manage the present affairs, That
they would seriously remember the strict account they are
to give before the Iudge of the quick and the dead, Considering
deeply how fearful a thing it is to oppresse the consciences
of their Brethren, either by pressing them to act
where they finde no satisfactory warrant or by putting heavy
pressures upon them for not acting according to their injunctions,
and especially that they offer not to insnare by
new Oaths, or Bonds those that make conscience of the
great Oath of their Solemn Covenant, and hitherto have
proven faithful and constant in promoving joyntly all the
ends thereof.
</p>

<p>
If this our faithful warning finde favourable acceptance,
so that the grievous things already enacted, be no more prosecuted
and pressed, we shall blesse God who reigns in the
Kingdoms and Councels of men: But if it fall out otherwise
(as God forbid) we have liberate our souls of the guiltinesse
of this sinful way of Engagement, and of all the miseries
that shall ensue thereby upon this Kirk and Kingdom,
And shall lament before the Lord that our labours have not
as yet had the desired successe. In the meantime, we dare
not cast away our confidence, but trusting in the name of the
Lord, and staying upon our God, shall by his grace and assistance
continue stedfast in our Solemn Covenants, and
faithful in all the duties of our Calling.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n="401"/><anchor id="Pg401"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>August. 1. 1648. Antemeridiem.</hi> Sess. 22.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>The General Assemblies Answer to the Paper
presented from the Honourable Committee of Estates
of the Date</hi> Iuly 28. 1648.</head>

<p>
The General Assembly having considered the Paper of
the 28. of <hi rend='italic'>July</hi>, delivered to them from the Honourable
Committee of Estates, Do finde that the first part thereof
concerning the great Offers made by the Parliament
and Committee of Estates for the security of Religion, is
no other but what was fully answered in our last Paper of
the 25. of <hi rend='italic'>July</hi>, delivered to their Lordships, wherein
it was plainly demonstrat by Theologicall reasons (though
their Lordships are pleased to call them Politick) that the
present Engagement is inconsistent with the safety and security
of Religion. Next whereas it is affirmed in their Lordships
Paper, that the grounds and reasons are the same which
were fully answered before, we wish it had been instanced
when and where they were answered, for we know no such
thing.
</p>

<p>
Another reflection upon that former Paper of ours is thus
expressed, <hi rend='italic'>That the Generall Assembly hath proceeded to such a
Declaration before they had in an Ecclesiaslick way from clear testimonies
out of the Word of God or convencing of our consciences, demonstrate
the unlawfulnesse of the undertaking</hi>: Where we can see
no reason why it should seem so very strange to the Honourable
Committee that the Generall Assembly hath so proceeded
to a Declaration of their judgement concerning this
businesse, For as it hath been no unusuall thing, but very
ordinary that approved Synods, both Provinciall, Nationall,
and Oecumeniall have declared their judgement
without publishing the particular grounds &amp; reasons thereof
from Scripture (a work more proper for full Tractates then
for Synodicall Decrees or Cannons.) So if their Lordships
had been pleased to attend (for many attended not) the
late Parliament-Sermons mainly intended for their Lordships
information, and had with mindes unprejudiced,
<pb n="402"/><anchor id="Pg402"/>
hearkened thereunto, and searched in to all the Papers lately
published in Print by the Commission of the last Assembly,
they might have been by the blessing of God convinced
from the Word of God of the unlawfulnesse of the present
Engagement.
</p>

<p>
There are three things which may justly seem to us more
strange: One is, That the Declaration of Parliament having
given assurance in this manner, <hi rend='italic'>We are resolved not to ingage in
any War before the necessity and lawfulnesse thereof be cleared, so as
all who are wel-affected may be satisfied therewith</hi>, yet now they
have ingaged in War without any such clearing of the necessity
and lawfulnesse thereof, or satisfaction given to the
wel-affected.
</p>

<p>
Another is, that although there are so great professions
and offers in the generall to satisfie what can be desired for
the security of Religion, yet none of those particulars desired
by the late Commission of the Kirk for the security of
Religion have been granted. We shall here onely give instance
in one of those desires, which was, that his Majesties
concessions and offers concerning Religion, sent home
from the Isle of <hi rend='italic'>Wight</hi>, having been found by the said
Commission unsatisfactory and destructive to the Covenant,
might be by the Parliament declared unsatisfactory to their
Lordships.
</p>

<p>
In this great point there hath been no satisfaction given,
onely it was lightly touched in one clause of the Parliaments
Declaration, and so ambiguously expressed, as might suffer
many interpretations, and although this ambiguity was
clearly laid open by the Commissioners of the last Generall
Assembly in their Representation; yet to this day there hath
been nothing published neither by the Parliament nor Committee
of Estates to give any clearer satisfaction, by disclaiming
those offers and concessions as unsatisfactory to the parliament:
So that this (if there were no more) gives us
great cause to apprehend that there is a greater mystery latent
in that businesse then yet appeareth.
</p>

<p>
A third thing which seemeth strange to us is, That their
Lordships desire of arguments from Scripture to prove the
unlawfulnesse of this Engagement was not propounded to
<pb n="403"/><anchor id="Pg403"/>
the Commissioners of the last Assembly, before the emitting of
the Declaration of Parliament, and before the Levies (when
it had been most orderly &amp; seasonable) but is now propounded
after publick resolutions and Declarations, yea not till
those resolutions are put in actuall execution.
</p>

<p>
However seeing their Lordships do now desire proofs
from Scripture for the unlawfulnesse of the Engagement.
</p>

<p>
We answer, That as joyning and concurring in this Engagement
is unlawfull to all the wel-affected in this Kingdom,
their consciences being altogether unsatisfied in the
lawfulnesse thereof; and as it is unlawfull in the manner of
putting it in execution, being accompanied with so many
injuries, oppressions, and crying abominations, and with
so much persecution of piety; so it is unlawfull in the own
nature of it, and as it is stated upon the grounds of the Declarations
of Parliament, and Committee of Estates. And
this unlawfulnesse of the Engagement in it self, we have
demonstrate in the Declaration herewith communicate to
their Lordships, unto which we remit them for satisfaction
in that point, and do nor doubt but their Lordships may be
convinced thereby of the evill of their way, and that it is so
far from being a pious and necessary Engagement (as their
Lordships are pleased to call it) that it is a most unlawfull and
sinfull Engagement to be repented of, and forsaken by all
that have any hand in it, as they desire to make their peace
with God, And we heartily wish that their Lordships subsequent
proceedings may be reall testimonies, that their
calling for Scripture proofs was from a reall desire to be informed
and edified.
</p>

<p>
As to their Lordships other desire of our demonstrating
from the Word of God, that the Kirk hath interest in the
undertakings and Engagements in War, and what that
interest is, We had thought this point to be without controversie
in this Kingdom, not onely in respect of Kirk and
State, their joyning and co-operating (each in their proper
sphere,) in the former Expeditions of this Kingdom into
<hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, but also because the very Conferences which
have been between Committees of Kirk and State concerning
<pb n="404"/><anchor id="Pg404"/>
this undertaking and Engagement, doth plainly suppose
an interest of the Kirk in such affairs.
</p>

<p>
If their Lordships mean any politick interest in such undertakings,
we claim no such thing, if the meaning be of a
Spirituall interest and so far as concerneth the point of Conscience,
there can be no doubt thereof made by such as do
with <hi rend='italic'>David</hi> make the testimonies of the Lord their Counsellers,
<hi rend='italic'>Psalm</hi> 119. 24. And consult with God as he used to do
in undertaking War: It is also to be remembred that <hi rend='italic'>Joshua</hi>
and all the Congregation of <hi rend='italic'>Israel</hi> were commanded to go out
and in at the word of <hi rend='italic'>Eliazer</hi> the priest, who was to aske councell
of the Lord for them, <hi rend='italic'>Numb.</hi> 27. 28. Hath not the
Word of God prescribed to the Christian Magistrate the Rules
of a Lawfull War, And doth it not belong, to particular
Ministers, much more to the Assemblies of the Kirk, to
declare the minde of God from Scripture, for all sorts of duties,
and against all sorts of sins. And if the present War be
a case of conscience, and alledged to be the most fit and necessary
means for preservation of Religion, who seeth not
that the Kirk hath an undoubted interest in resolving and
determining such a case of Conscience from the word of God.
This we shall onely adde, that whereas in the Parliaments
Letter to the Presbyteries there instances were adduced by
way of reflection upon the proceedings of the late Commission,
as medling with Civill matters in which they had no
Interest, The Commission did in their Printed Vindication
so clear from Scripturall grounds their Interest in such
things as their Lordships might have been easily satisfied in
that point. We shall here onely mention one passage containing
a good and safe rule for such Cases, The Duties of
the second Table, as well as of the first, as namely, The
Duties between King and Subject, Parents and Children,
Husbands and Wives, Masters and Servants, and the like
being contained in, and to be taught and cleared from the
Word of God, are in that respect, and so far as concerneth
the point of Conscience, a subject of Ministeriall Doctrine,
and in difficult cases a subject of cognizance and Judgement,
to the Assemblies of the Kirk.
</p>

</div>

</div>
<pb n="405"/><anchor id="Pg405"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Eodem die Postmeridiem,</hi> Sess. 23.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>A Declaration and Exhortation of the Generall
Assembly of the Church of</hi> Scotland, <hi rend='italic'>to their
Brethren of</hi> England.</head>

<p>
As the necessity of preserving a right understanding and
mutuall confidence betwixt the Churches of Christ in
both Kingdoms constrain us, so the good acceptance and
the suitable affections that the Declaration of the last Generall
Assembly met with in <hi rend='italic'>England</hi> from the Lovers of the
Covenant and present Reformation, together with the many
Testimonies that have of late been given unto the Truth in
that Land, invites and incourages us to make known unto
our Brethren there, our sense of the present condition of
publick affairs, so far as concerns <hi rend='italic'>Religion</hi> and the point of
Conscience.
</p>

<p>
The dispensation of God in ruling of the Nations, and in
the revolutions of his Providence towards them, is full of
wonder in all the earth; And we, who live in this Island,
have cause to look upon it with speciall observation, in regard
of that which concerns our selves. For many generations
these two Kingdoms stood at odds and were the instruments
of many sufferings and calamities one to another, untill
at last the Lord having compassion upon both, did unite
them under one King; which great and long desired Blessing
hath received such increase from our being united together
in one League and Covenant as doth adde much to the
good and happinesse of both Nations: Therefore is it to be
looked upon by all the Lovers of Truth and Peace in these
Lands as a just ground of much thanksgiving &amp; many praises
unto GOD, even in the day of our greatest calamity
and affliction what ever befall, as we know no cause why
we should forget so a great a mercy or repent of so good a
work.
</p>

<p>
But as the common Enemies of these Kingdoms studied
by all means to keep them from entring into that Covenant,
so hath all their power and Policy, now, for five years past,
<pb n="406"/><anchor id="Pg406"/>
been imployed to bring it to nought. As soon as it had being
the Popish, Prelaticall and Malignant Party did bend all
their forces against it; and when by the mighty hand of
GOD they were scattered and brought to confusion, in
their stead stood up in <hi rend='italic'>England</hi> a generation who have perverted
the Truth, and by turning aside into Errour have obstructed
the work of Reformation; and by forsaking of the
Covenant, and forgetting of the Oath of GOD, have
brought a great reproach upon his Name, and made the
Enemy to blaspheme; whose unthankfulnesse and unstedfastnesse,
with the many provocations of these Lands, hath provoked
the Lord again to raise out of the dust the horn of
Malignants, and to arm them with such power as is terrible
to his People, and threatenes his Work with ruine. And
albeit, we acknowledge our selves bound and are still resolved
to preserve and defend his Majesties Person and Authority
in the preservation and defence of the true Religion and Liberties
of the Kingdoms: Yet it is unto us matter of very
great sorrow and grief that so many in our Land should so
far joyn in Malignant Designes, and that there should be
found amongst us who have undertaken and are now putting
in execution an unlawfull War promoving their ends and
opposing and making void (so far as in them lies) the Ends
of the Covenant: Neverthelesse in this we cannot but rejoyce
that they went not without a Witnesse and a Warning
disswading them to go.
</p>

<p>
And we desire our Brethren of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi> to know, that as a
very considerable number of the Members of the Parliament
did dissent from and protest against the proceedings of
the major part in reference to this Engagement so all the
particular Synods and Presbyteries in this Kingdom, excepting
some few, who by reason of their remotenesse and
shortenesse of time had not the opportunity, have most
harmoniously joyned with and seconded the Desires of the
Commissioners of the General Assembly for preventing so
unlawful a War: And now the Commissioners out of all
the Provinces conveened in this National Assembly, as
after an exact examination they have unanimously approved
the proceedings of the Commissioners of the former Assembly
<pb n="407"/><anchor id="Pg407"/>
against that Engagement; so have they emitted a Declaration
to all the People of GOD in this Land, shewing
it to be contrary to GODS Word and to the solemn League
and Covenant. Neither have Ministers onely by their
preaching, and Kirk Iudicatories by their Petitions and
Declarations given testimony against it; but many others
in this Land also by supplicating the High and Honourable
Court of Parliament for satisfaction to their Conscience
thereanent: And when it could not be obtained many
have chosen rather to suffer the spoiling of their goods with
joy, then to sin against GOD by complying with an evil
course. And many of the Officers of our former
Army, who are of special note for their good carriage and
deserving in the Cause of GOD, have rather choosed to
quit their charges then to joyn in it: Nay, the well-affected,
both Ministers and People, as they do bear testimony
against it before men, so groan under it before
GOD. So that this character may justly be put upon it by
all who shall speak of it now or in after Ages, That as it is
a foul breach of the Covenant under a pretence and profession
of being for the ends of the Covenant, so being carried
on against the Consciences of the people, and contrary
to the most harmonious and universal Testimonies of many
Presbyteries and Synods that have been given against it, it is
a sinning with many witnesses. A paralel will hardly be
found in this or in any other Land wherein a publick sinful
course hath been carried on with so high a hand against the
Consciences of the People of GOD, and against so many
Warnings of the Servants of GOD, and general opposition
from the Judicatories of the Kirk; which yet is the
less to be wondred at, because the greatest part of those
who have been most active in contriving and carrying on of
the fame, were either once open Enemies, or alwayes
secret underminers, or indifferent and neutral in the Cause
of GOD.
</p>

<p>
But whatsoever be the falling away of such, we shall desire
and do expect that our Brethren in <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, who continue
faithful, may rest confident of the generality of all
such of this Kingdom as were at first active in promoting
<pb n="408"/><anchor id="Pg408"/>
the Covenant and Work of Reformation, that they are also
still faithful in adhering thereunto, and walking after their
former principles do resolve to abide stedfast and to hold
fast the bands of Brotherhood and union between these
Kingdoms: Neither are we lesse confident of the like Resolutions
and Affections of our Brethren in <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>: The
many Testimonies which the Truth and Cause of
CHRIST, the Covenant and Presbyterial Government
have lately received from that cloud of Witnesses of the
Ministery in several Provinces and Countries of that Kingdom,
after the example of the worthy Ministery of the City of
<hi rend='italic'>London</hi>, against the Errours of <hi rend='italic'>Independency,
Anabaptism, Antinomianisin, Arminianism, Socinianism, Faminism,
Libertinism, Sceptism, Erastianism,</hi> and other new
and dangerous Doctrines spred and received amongst many
in that Nation; As they are unto us matter of great praise
and hearty thanksgiving unto GOD, so also an evidence
of the stedfastness of many in <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, and a token for good,
and a wide door of hope that the Lord will perfect his Work
and bring forth the headstone of his House in that Land.
It shall be the wisdom of each Nation to keep the golden
path of truth and righteousnesse betwixt the crooked
wayes of Malignants upon the one hand and Secteries upon
the other, and for each of the Nations so to look upon another,
as to distinguish betwixt the prevalent part and the
better part, and betwixt friends and foes.
</p>

<p>
We conceive it to be high time for both Nations to search
and try their ways and turn again to the LORD, that he who
hath wounded us may heal us, and he who hath broken us
may binde us up. The sin of both hath been the departing
from the rule of the Covenant, and that we did not trust
God for the prefecting of his Work, walking by the rule
of piety, but took ourselves to humane polices, and endeavoured
to carry it on by carnal and worldly means. For
as <hi rend='italic'>Scotland</hi> did to much connive at and comply with Malignants,
which is the immediate and neerest cause of all our
present troubles and distractions; so <hi rend='italic'>England</hi> neglecting to
hold fast the truth and to submit themselves to the Government
of Jesus Christ, so clearly held forth by the pious and
<pb n="409"/><anchor id="Pg409"/>
learned Assembly of Divines, did connive at many abominable
Blasphemies and Errors, and complying with Sectaries,
gave way to their wicked Toleration. Neither is it
the least part of the sin of both Lands, that they have more
minded the outward then the inward Reformation, the erecting
of the outward Fabrick of GODS House, then
the providing furniture for it by advancing the power of the
Gospel, that his glory may be seen in his Temple. Because
of these things is there great wrath from the LORD against
these Kingdoms, and this controversie shall be continued
until we really turn away from our crooked paths.
Therefore as we wish that none of this Land may flatter
themselves in their evil wayes, but repent and amend, so
we desire our Brethren of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi> to consider what hath been
the bitter fruits of their slow progresse in and neglect of the
Work of Reformation, and of their connivance at and complying
with Sectaries, and to do no more so, but that whatsoever
is commanded by the God of Heaven, it be diligently
done for the House of the God of Heaven.
</p>

<p>
We trust that the Parliament of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi> will be wise to
remember and consider the great mercies of GOD towards
them in delivering them from all their Enemies, &amp; the many
opportunities put into their hands for advancing and establishing
the work of Reformation; for neglect whereof
God hath now again threatned to lift up their Enemies above
them, that he may once more prove what they will do for
his Name, and for setling the order of his House. God
forbid that they should run from one extream to another,
from compliance with Sectaries to compliance with Malignants,
and hearken to terms of an unsafe and sinful Peace,
We cannot but abhor the purposes of any who minde the
subversion of Monarchical Government, which we heartily
wish to be preserved and continued in his Majesties Person,
and Posterity; and we do no lesse dislike the Practises of
those who deal so hardly with his Majesties Person, earnestly
desiring that he were in the condition he was into by the advice
of both Kingdoms before he was taken away by a party
of Sir <hi rend='italic'>Thomas Fairfax</hi> Army; Nor are we against the restoring
of the King to the exercise of his power in aright order
<pb n="410"/><anchor id="Pg410"/>
and way. Yet considering what great expence of blood
and pains these Kingdoms have been at for maintaining their
just liberties and bringing the Work of Reformation this
length; And considering his Majesties great aversnesse from
setling Reformation of Religion, and his adhering still to
Episcopacy; We trust that security will be demanded and
had from his Majesty for Religion, before he be brought
to one of his Houses in or neer about <hi rend='italic'>London</hi>, with honour,
freedom and safety. And considering of what importance
the solemne League and Covenant is unto all the interests of
both Kingdoms concerning their Religion, Liberties and
Peace, to make an agreement without establishing of it,
were not only to rob these Nations of the blessings they have
already attained by it, but to open a door to let in all the corruptions
that have been formerly in the Kirks of God in these
lands, &amp; all the abuses and usurpations that have been in the
civil government, &amp; again to divide these two Kingdoms that
are now so happily united and conjoyned: &amp; therefore as we
wish that all mis-understanding betwixt the Nations, &amp; betwixt
the King &amp; People may be removed, that there may be
a happy &amp; lasting Peace, so that there may be no agreement
without establishing and enjoyning the Covenant in all these
three Kingdoms; and that for this end God would give
wisdom to all that are intrusted in the managing of publick
Affairs that they may seasonably discover and carefully avoid
all snares which may be laid either by Sectaries, or Malignants,
or both, under colour of a Treaty of Peace. And
we are confident, through the Lord, that all the obstructions
and oppositions, by which his work has been retarded
and interrupted in this Island, shall not onely be taken
out of the way, but shall turn to the advantage and furtherance
of it at last. The onely wise God can and will bring
about his holy purposes by unlikely, yea by contrary means:
And God forbid that either our Brethren in England
or our selves should give way to despondency of Spirit, and
cast away the hopes of that so much prayed for and so much
wished for Reformation of Religion, and Uniformity in
all the parts thereof according to the Covenant: And now
it is our hearts desire and prayer to God, that amidst the
<pb n="411"/><anchor id="Pg411"/>
many tryals and tentations of these times, none of the Servants
of God and witnesses of Jesus Christ may be deserted,
or left to themselves to comply either with the Malignant
party upon the one hand, or with Sectaries upon the other.
Brethren pray for us, and the God of all grace, who hath
called us unto his eternal glory, after that ye have suffered a
while, make you perfect, stablish strengthen and settle you.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>August. 2. 1648. <hi rend='italic'>Antemeridiem,</hi> Sess. 26.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Answer to the Letter of the Reverend Assembly
of Divines in</hi> England.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Right Honourable, Right Reverend and Wel beloved in
our LORD,</hi>
</p>

<p>
We cease not to give thanks to the Father of our Lord
Jesus, by whose strength you keep the Word of his patience
now in these times, when many depart from the Faith,
giving heed to seducing Spirits; As also, that he who hath
founded <hi rend='italic'>Zion</hi>, hath been pleased, by our Covenant sworn
to the most high God, to lay the hopefull foundation of a
glorious Work in these three Kingdoms, to unite his People
therein, as one stick in the hand of the LORD.
</p>

<p>
We cannot but acknowledge to the Honour and Glory of
the Lord, Wonderfull in counsell and excellent in working,
that hee hath strongly united the spirits of all the godly in
this Kingdom, and of his Servants in the Ministery, first in
the severall Presbyteries and Synods, and now in this Nationall
Assembly, in an unanimous and constant adhering to
our first Principles and the Solemn League and Covenant,
And particularly in giving a testimony against the present
unlawfull Engagement in War: Yet it semeth good to the LORD who hath
his Fire in <hi rend='italic'>Zion</hi> and Furnace in <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>,
for the purging of the vessels of his house to suffer many adversaries
to arise with violence to obstruct and stop this great
and effectuall door, which the Lord hath opened unto us.
But we know that he openeth, and no man shutteth, and
shutteth, and no man openeth: yea, he will cause them
<pb n="412"/><anchor id="Pg412"/>
who say they are for the Covenant and are not, but are Enemies
thereto, and do associate with Malignants or Sectaries,
to acknowledge that God hath loved us, and that his truth
is in us and with us. And now dearly beloved, seeing the
Lord hath kept you together so many years, when the battel
of the Warriour hath been with confused noise, and garments
rolled in blood, the Lord also sitting as a refiner to purifie
the Sons of <hi rend='italic'>Levi</hi>, and blessing you with unity and soundnesse
in the Faith, we are confident you will not cease to
give a publick testimony for Christ, both against Sectaries
and all Seducers, who prophecie lies in the name of the
LORD, and against Malignants and Incendiaries (the
Prelaticall and Popish Faction) who now again bestir themselves
to hold up the rotten and tottering throne of Antichrist,
and are (whatever they pretend) the reall enemies
of Reformation: As also, that as the Embassadors of
<hi rend='italic'>Jesus Christ</hi> and his Watchmen, you will give seasonable warning
to the Honourable Houses of Parliament, that now
(after the losse of the opportunity of so many years) they
would, in their places, repair the Houses of the LORD,
that lyeth so long desolate, and promove the work of Reformation
and Uniformity according to the Covenant.
</p>

<p>
For if the Honourable Houses of Parliament had timely
made use of that power, which God hath put in their hands
for suppressing of Sectaries, and had taken a speedy course
for setling of Presbyterial Government, (a speciall and effectuall
means appointed by God to purge his Church from
all scandals in Doctrine and Practise) Then had not the insolencie
of that party arisen to such a height, as to give occasion
to the Malignants of both Kingdoms to justifie and
blesse themselves in their old opposition to the work of Reformation,
and to encourage one another, to new and more
dangerous attempts; Neither had the Malignant party ever
grown so strong in this Kingdom, if the Sectaries had not
been connived at in ENGLAND; For their prime
pretence (for their present rising in Armes) is, that they
may suppress the Sectaries, and vindicate the King from
that base condition, unto which he is brought by that party:
Yet these do not wisely, nor well, who avoiding or opposing
<pb n="413"/><anchor id="Pg413"/>
Sectarisme, split themselves upon the rock of Malignancy,
and by taking that party by the hand how, do own
all the cruelty, bloodshed and other ungodly and unjust Acts,
which they have done since the beginning of this Reformation.
And as we take thankfully your testimony of your steering
so steady &amp; even a course between the dangerous rocks
of Prophanesse and Malignancy on the one hand, and of
Errours, Schisme, Heresie and Blasphemy on the other hand;
So we trust ye will not cease to give testimony against both
these evils, and represent the same to the Honourable Houses
of Parliament, as you shall have fit occasion; And that you
will gravely warne your dissenting Brethren what a door
they keep open for Errors, and Heresies, by their tenet of
Independency; Whereby they leave no means of Authoritative
Ecclesiastick Suppression of Errours; If an <hi rend='italic'>Independent</hi>
Congregation will please to own them. We also are confident
that you will be remembrancers to that famous City
of <hi rend='italic'>London</hi>, and the whole Kingdom, of their Engagement
to the LORD, in the solemn League and Covenant:
Nor will we suffer our selves to believe that the wel-affected
in the Houses of Parliament, In the City of <hi rend='italic'>London</hi>, and
throughout that whole Kingdom will agree or harken to the
motions of any such Treaty of Peace, as leaves out the best
security for Religion, the Cause of GOD, and the solemn
League and Covenant. Thus desiring the continuance
of your Prayers to God for us, in this hour of temptation;
and promising (through his grace and strength) to continue
in prayers for you, We commit you to the infinite Wisdom,
Power, Goodnesse, and Faithfulnesse of our blessed God
and Father in <hi rend='italic'>Christ</hi>, in whom we are,
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>2. August 1648.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Your very loving and affectionate
Brethren to serve you</hi>,
</p>

<p>
DIRECT
</p>

<p>
To the Right Honourable,
And Right Reverend the
Assembly of Divines in
<hi rend='italic'>England</hi> now assembled
at <hi rend='italic'>Westminster</hi>.
</p>

<p>
The Ministers and Elders
conveened in the <hi rend='italic'>Generall
Assembly</hi> of the Kirk
of <hi rend='italic'>Scotland</hi>.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n="414"/><anchor id="Pg414"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Eodem die Postmeridiem</hi>, Sess. 25.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>The Humble Supplication of the Generall Assembly,
To the Right Honourable the Committee
of Estates.</hi></head>

<p>
Whereas the High and Honourable Court of Parliament
and your Lordships were pleased to injoyn the subscription
of a Declaration and Band of the date <hi rend='italic'>June 10.
1648.</hi> And we having found after such examination and tryal,
as is competent to the Servants of God in an Ecclesiastick
way, that the same is a snare to the Consciences of the People
of GOD in this Land to involve them in guiltinesse,
and to draw them from their former principles and Vows in
the solemn League and Covenant, as doth more fully appear
in our Act concerning the same herewith presented unto
your Lordships. Therefore from our zeal to the glory of
GOD and tender care of the souls committed unto us; and
for our exonoration, As we do seriously exhort that your
Lordships would be sensible of the guilt that you have already
brought upon your selves and others, by injoyning
and urging that subscription, So we do earnestly and in the
bowels of <hi rend='italic'>Jesus Christ</hi> intreat, That your Lordships would
take such order and course as that it may be no further
pressed upon the people of GOD throughout the
Land.
</p>

<p>
And because the people groan under the violence and
oppression of Officers and Souldiers in their Quarterings of
otherwise throughout all the corners of the Countrey (which
as it hath ascended into the ears of the Lord of Hosts, so we
doubt not but it is come to your knowledge) We conceive
it to be incumbent to us to represent the same to your Lordships,
beseeching and obtesting you that as you would not
desire that the Lord should visit because of these things,
you would think upon an effectuall remedy for punishing
and redressing what is past, and preventing the like in time
coming.
</p>

<pb n="415"/><anchor id="Pg415"/>

<p>
And whereas by an Act and inhibition of your Lordships
The Liberty of Printing being one of the Kirks Priviledges
confirmed by Parliament is restrained, Therefore we intreat
that the inhibition upon the Printers may be taken off.
</p>

<p>
And now having condiscended upon a Declaration to all
the Members of this Kirk concerning present dangers &amp; duties,
We do in all humility offer the same to your Lordships
(together with our Answer to the Paper last sent to us from
your Lordships) professing in the sight of GOD (whose
Servants we are) that we have walked herein according to
the rule of his Word, and have nothing before our eyes but
his Glory, and the well of his People, And therefore intreats
your Lordships, that you would seriously ponder
the same without prejudice, and as you desire to be comforted
in the day of your accompts, to make right use of the
light that is holden forth therein from Gods Word.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>August 3. 1648. <hi rend='italic'>Antemeridiem</hi>, Sess. 26.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act for censuring Ministers for their silence,
and not speaking to the corruptions of the time.</hi></head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly, taking to their serious consideration,
the great scandals which have lately encreased,
partly through some Ministers their reserving and not
declaring of themselves against the prevalent sins of the
times, partly through the spite, Malignity, and insolency
of others against such Ministers as have faithfully and freely
reproved the Sins of the times without respect of persons,
Do therefore for preventing and removing such scandals
hereafter, Appoint and Ordain, that every Minister do by
the word of Wisdom apply his Doctrine faithfully against
the publick Sins and Corruptions of these times, and particularly
against the Sins and Scandals in that Congregation
wherein he lives, according to the Act of the Generall Assembly
1596. revived by the Assembly at <hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi>, 1638.
Appointing that such as shall be found not applying their
<pb n="416"/><anchor id="Pg416"/>
Doctrine to corruptions, which is the Pastorall gift, cold,
and wanting of Spirituall zeal, flatters and dissembling of
publick sins, and especially of great Personages in their
Congregations, that all such persons be censured according
to the degree of their faults and continuing therein be deprived;
And according to the Act of the Generall Assembly
1646. <hi rend='italic'>Sess.</hi> 10. That beside all other scandals, silence, or
ambiguous speaking in the publike Cause much more detracting
and disaffected speeches be seasonably censured; As
therefore the Errours and exorbitancies of Sectaries in England
are not to be passed in silence, but plain warning to be
given of the danger of so near a contagion, that people
may beware of it, and such as neglect this duty to be Censured
by their Presbyteries, So it is thought fit and Appointted
by the Assembly, conform to the foresaid Acts. That
the main current of applications in Sermons may run along
against the evils that prevail at home, and namely against
the contempt of the Word, against all profanesse, against
the present defection from the League and Covenant, against
the unlawful Engagement in War, against the unlawful
Band and Declaration of the Date of the 10. of June ordained
to be subscribed by all the Subjects, and other unjust
Decrees established by Law, against the Plots and Practises
of Malignants, and against the Principles and Tenents of
<hi rend='italic'>Erastianism</hi>, which spread among divers in this Kingdom;
For the better confutation whereof, it is hereby Recommended
to the Ministery to study that point of controversie
well, that they may be the more able to stop the mouths of
gainsayers: Tis also hereby Recommended to the several
Presbyteries and Provincial Synods, that they make special
enquiry and trial concerning all the Ministery in their
bounds, And if any be found too sparing general, or ambiguous
in the foresaid applications and reproofs that they
be sharply rebuked, dealt with, and warned to amend
under the pain of suspension from their Ministery; And if
after such warning given they amend not, that such be suspended
by Presbyteries, and in case of their negligence by
the Synods till the next General Assembly; But if there be
any, who do neglect and omit such applications and reproofs,
<pb n="417"/><anchor id="Pg417"/>
and continue in such negligence after admonition
and dealing with them, they are to be cited, and after due
triall of the offence to be deposed, for being pleasers of
men rather then servants of <hi rend='italic'>Christ</hi>, for giving themselves to
a detestable indifferency or neutrality in the Cause of God, &amp;c.
for defrauding the souls of people, yea for being highly
guilty of the blood of souls in not giving them warning:
Much more are such Ministers to be censured with Deposition
from their Ministry who preach for the lawfulnes or
pray for the success of the present unlawfull Engagement,
or that go along with the Army themselves, or who subscribe
any Bands or take any Oaths not approved by the
General Assembly or their Commissioners, or by their counsel,
countenance or approbation make themselves accessory
to the taking of such Bands and Oaths by others: It is to be
understood that if any Minister preach in defence of or pray
for the successe of the Sectaries in <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, he is likewayes
to be censured by deposition. And this we adde as a generall
rule to be observed on both hands, but not as if we had
found any of the Ministery of this Kingdom to be favourers
of the Sectaries in <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>:
</p>

<p>
And in case any Minister for his freedom in preaching,
and faithfull discharge of his conscience shall be in the face
of the Congregation or elsewhere upbraided, railed at,
mocked, or threatened, or if any injury or violence be done
to his person, or any stop and disturbance made to him in
the exercise of his Ministeriall calling, The Presbyterie of
the bounds shall forthwith enter in processe with the offender,
and whoever he be Charge him to satisfie the Discipline
of the Kirk by publick Repentance, which if any do
not, or refuse to do, That then the Presbyterie proceed
to Excommunication against him; In all which Presbyteries
and Synods are to give an account of their diligence:
And the Assembly Appoints this Act to be intimate in the
several Congregations of this Kirk.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n="418"/><anchor id="Pg418"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>August 4. 1648. <hi rend='italic'>Postmeridiem</hi>, Sess. 21.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Overtures concerning the education of the Hie-land
Boys in the Province of</hi> Argyle.</head>

<p>
This day the report following being made from the Committee
concerning the education of Hie-land Boys in
<hi rend='italic'>Argyle</hi>, viz.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>The Committee considering the Bill remitted by the Generall Assembly
to us concerning the Hie-land Boys</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>who are given up
to be fourty in number of good spirits and approven by the
Province of</hi> Argyle) <hi rend='italic'>Do humbly think, that four of them who
are ready for the Colledge should be recommended to the Universities
to get Burses on in every Colledge. As for the rest of the 40,
who are to be brought up at Grammar Schools, The Committee
thinks that if the said Boys should be scattered through the
Kingdom they should lose the Irish Language, and so the Assembly
shall fail of their purpose to make them usefull for the
Hie-lands: And therefore do humbly conceive that it were
fitting that every Congregation pay yearly fourty Shillings Scots
for maintaining the said Boys at Schools in</hi> Glasgow, <hi rend='italic'>or in
other places where many of them may be together accepted of,
and that the money be brought in yearly to the General Assembly
by the Commissioners of Presbyteries, and that Presbyteries augment
or diminish the said proportion according to the ability of
every Congregation.</hi>
</quote>

<p>
The Assembly having considered the foresaid Report,
Approves the first Overture, And recommends <hi rend='italic'>Colin Campbell</hi>
to the University of <hi rend='italic'>Aberdeen</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Duncan
Campbell</hi> to <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Patrick
Campbell</hi> to <hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Zachary
Maccullum</hi> to St. <hi rend='italic'>Leonards</hi> Colledge in St.
<hi rend='italic'>Andrews</hi>: As also Approve the
second Overture, seriously Recommending to Presbyteries,
That the said fourty shillings be collected carefully and sent to
<hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi>, And the Ministers of <hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi>
shall appoint some sufficient man in that Town to receive the said Collection
from Presbyteries, And to take charge of the boording
and entertainment of the saids Boys in <hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi> at Schooles,
and they shall send in the names of the Boys with a Certificate
of their proficiency yearly to the Generall Assembly:
<pb n="419"/><anchor id="Pg419"/>
And this Collection shall onely endure for the space of
twelve years.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>August 5. 1648. <hi rend='italic'>Antemeridiem,</hi> Sess. 30.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Explanation of the fifth Article of the Overtures
concerning Appeals past in the Assembly, 1643.</hi></head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly for clearing the sense of the
fifth Article of the Overtures concerning Appeals in
the Assembly, <hi rend='italic'>1643. Sess. 2</hi> Declare, that if Appellations,
<hi rend='italic'>Post latam sententiam</hi> be not presented to the Judicatory
when the sentence is pronounced: The party shall then
immediately after the sentence protest for liberty of Appeal,
as he shall see cause; And accordingly within ten
dayes shall give in his Appeal in writ under his hand, either
to the Judicatory or the Moderator thereof, otherwise the
Appeal is not to be respected.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Eodem die 1648. Antemeridiem,</hi> Sess. 30.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act discharging deposed or suspended Ministers
from any exercise of the Ministery, or
medling with the stipend.</hi></head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly considering that according
to the ancient practise and order of this Kirk, the
Censure of Suspension and Deposition of Ministers
is both <hi rend='italic'>ab officio</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>â beuoficio</hi>, as is
also acknowledged by the 20. Act of the Parliament, <hi rend='italic'>Anno 1644.</hi>
And that the continuance of suspended or deposed Ministers in the exercise
of the Ministery or in the possession of their stipend hath
been &amp; ought to be accompted and censured as a great contempt
of the Authority and Censures of the Kirk, Considering
<pb n="420"/><anchor id="Pg420"/>
also that the continuance of deposed Ministers in the
possession of the stipend, is a great prejudice and obstruction
to the planting of the vaiking Kirk, and to the service of
God there. Therefore do declare and Ordain, That whosoever
after the sentence of Deposition pronounced against
them, Do either exercise any part of the Ministeriall calling
in the places they formerly served in; or elsewhere, or
do possesse, meddle, or intromet with the stipend or other
benefits whatsoever belonging to these Kirks they served
at, They shall be proceeded against with Excommunication;
And if any suspended Minister during his suspension, either
exercise any part of the Ministeriall Calling, or intromet
with the Stipend, That he be Deposed, And after deposition,
continuing in either of these faults, That he be
processed with Excommunication; But prejudice always to
them of their stipend resting for by-gone service and of any
recompence due for building or repairing of the Manse according
to the ordinary practise. And the Assembly recommends
to Presbyteries seriously to be carefull of the putting
of this Act in execution.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>August 7. 1648. <hi rend='italic'>Antemeridiem.</hi> Sess 31.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>The Assemblies Declaration of the falsehood
and forgerie of a lying scandalous Pamphlet put forth
under the name of their Reverend Brother Mastr</hi>
Alexander Henderson <hi rend='italic'>after hes death.</hi></head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly of this Kirk having seen a Printed
Paper, Intituled, <hi rend='italic'>The Declaration of</hi> Mr. Alexander
Henderson <hi rend='italic'>principall Minister of the Word of GOD at</hi> Edinburgh
<hi rend='italic'>and chief Commissioner from the Kirk of</hi> Scotland
<hi rend='italic'>to the Parliament and Synod of</hi> England <hi rend='italic'>made
upon his death-bed.</hi> And taking into
their serious consideration how many grosse lies and impudent
calumnies are therein contained; Out of the tender respect
which they do bear to his name (which ought to be
very precious to them and all posterity, for his faithfull
<pb n="421"/><anchor id="Pg421"/>
service in the great Work of Reformation in these Kingdoms,
wherein the Lord was pleased to make him eminently
instrumentall) and lest through the malice of some, and
ignorance of others the said Pamphlet should gain belief
among the weaker sort, They have thought fit to make
known and declare concerning the same as followeth.
</p>

<p>
That after due search and tryall they do finde that their
worthy brother Master <hi rend='italic'>Alexander Henderson</hi> did from the time
of his coming from <hi rend='italic'>London</hi> to <hi rend='italic'>Newcastle</hi> til
the last moment of his departure out of this life upon all occasions manifest
the constancy of his judgement touching the Work of Reformation
in these Kingdoms; Namely, in all his discourses
and conferences with his Majesty, and with his Brethren
who were employed with him in the same Trust at <hi rend='italic'>Newcastle</hi>,
In his Letters to the Commissioners at <hi rend='italic'>London</hi>, and particularly
in his last discourse to his Majestie at his departing
from <hi rend='italic'>Newcastle</hi>, being very weak and greatly decayed in his
Naturall strength. When he was come from <hi rend='italic'>Newcastle</hi> by
sea to this Kingdom, he was in such a weak worn and
failed condition, as it was evident to all who saw him, that
he was not able to frame any such Declaration, for he was
so spent that he died within eight dayes after his arrivall;
And all that he was able to speak in that time did clearly
shew his judgement of, and affection to the Work of Reformation
and Cause of God to be every way the same then,
that it was in the beginning and progresse thereof, as divers
Reverend Brethren who visited him have declared to this
Assembly, and particularly two Brethren, who constantly
attended him from the time he came home till his breath
expired. A further testimony may be brought from a short
Confession of Faith under his hand found amongst his Papers,
which is expressed as his last Words, wherein among
other mercies he declareth himself <hi rend='italic'>most of all obliged to the
grace and goodnesse of God for calling him to believe the Promises of
the Gospel, and for exalting him to be a Preacher of them to others,
and to be a willing though weak instrument in this great and wonderful
work of Reformation, which he earnestly beseecheth the Lord to
bring to a happy conclusion.</hi> Other reasons may be added from
the levity of the stile and manifest absurdities contained in
<pb n="422"/><anchor id="Pg422"/>
that Paper. Upon confederation of all which this Assembly
doth condemn the said Pamphlet as forged, scandalous,
and false, And further Declare the author and contriver of
the same void of charity and a good conscience, and a grosse
lyar and calumniator led by the Spirit of the accuser of the
Brethren.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act for taking the Covenant at the first receiving
of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, &amp;
for the receiving of it also by all Students at
their first entry to Colledges.</hi></head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly according to former recommendations,
Doth Ordain that all young Students take
the Covenant at their first entry to Colledges; And that
hereafter all Persons whatsoever take the Covenant at their
first receiving the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: Requiring
hereby Provinciall Assemblies, Presbyteries and Universities
to be carefull that this Act be observed, and accompt
thereof taken in the visitation of and particular
Kirks, and in the tryall of Presbyteries.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Eodem die Postmeridiem,</hi> Sess. 32.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act concerning Presbyteries maintaining of</hi>
Bursars.</head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly Understanding that the frequent
Recommendation of preceding Assemblies for
maintaining Bursars, is by many Presbyteries neglected,
Do therefore Ordain Synods to crave accompt thereof from
Presbyteries at every Provinciall meeting, Which with
the Presbyteries answer, shall be put upon record, That
so the part both of Presbyteries and Synods and their negligance
<pb n="423"/><anchor id="Pg423"/>
or diligence in so pious a work may be known by the
examination of the Provinciall books to each Generall Assembly.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>August 9. 1648. <hi rend='italic'>Antemeridiem</hi> Sess. 25.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act for dis-joyning the Presbyteries of</hi> Zetland,
<hi rend='italic'>from the Provinciall Synod of</hi>
Orkney <hi rend='italic'>and</hi> Cathnes.</head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly now after exact tryall, finding
that the Presbytery of <hi rend='italic'>Zetland</hi> cannot meet with the Provinciall
of <hi rend='italic'>Cathnes</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Orknay</hi> to which it was
adjoyned by an Act of the Assembly 1646. Sess. 11. And that the allowance
and dispensation granted in the preceding Assembly for the
halfe of their number to keep the meetings of the said Provinciall
cannot be observed in respect of the great distance
of that Isle by sea from the land, and the dangerousness of
the seas there, and of the passage through them, Therefore
after hearing the parties interested and serious deliberation
of the matter, The Assembly doth hereby Dis-joyn the Presbytery
of <hi rend='italic'>Zetland</hi> from the Provinciall of <hi rend='italic'>Cathnes</hi>
and <hi rend='italic'>Orknay</hi>, And declares for these reasons, That the said
Presbytery is to be hereafter subordinate immediately to the
Generall Assembly, For which cause, their Commissioners
are to be sent to each Generall Assembly the more carefully,
And it is hereby recommended to them that they send to
the next Assembly a particular information of the quality
and condition of all their Kirks according to the direction
of the act of the preceding Assembly Sess. 27. Entituled
an act for pressing and furthering the planting of Kirks.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n="424"/><anchor id="Pg424"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Aug. 10. 1648. <hi rend='italic'>Postmeridiem,</hi> Sess. 38.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Overtures for the Remedies of the grievous
and common Sins of the Land in this
present time.</hi></head>

<p>
The Sins of the Land and the Causes and occasions thereof
being considered, The following Remedies of these
Sins were propounded.
</p>

<p>
Civill Remedies.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>For the present, untill the Overtures prepared to be presented
to the Parliament, It is to be Recommended to every Congregation
to make use of the 9. Act of the Parliament 1645. at</hi>
Perth, <hi rend='italic'>for having Magistrates and Justices in every Congregation,
and of the 8. Act of the said Parliament against Swearing,
Drinking and mocking of Piety, and all other Acts
of Parliament for restraining or punishing of Vice; particularly
for the better restraining of the sin of Whoredom that each
Magistrate in every Congregation exact and make compt to
the Session of fourty Pounds for each Fornicatour and Fornicatrix,
of an hundred Merks for each one of their relapse in
Fornication, of an hundreth Pounds for each Adulterer and
Adulteress according to express Acts of Parliament which is
to be exacted of these who may pay it, and the discretion of the
Magistrate is to modifie it according to the ability or inability
of each Delinquent.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Domestick Remedies.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>1. Let care be taken of concionable receiving of Servants,
that they have testimonials of their honest behaviour: And
let all such as give testimonials take heed that these to whom they
give them, be free of scolding, swearing, lying and such
like more common sins, as well as fornication, adultery, drunkenesse,
and other grosse and hainous evils; Let the ordinary
time of giving Testimonials be in face of Session: And if an
extraordinary exigent be: Let it be given by the Minister with
<pb n="425"/><anchor id="Pg425"/>
consent of the elder of the bounds, wherein the person craving
the Testimonial hath resided; If they have fallen or relapsed
in scandalous sins, let their Testimonial bear both their fall
and Repentance.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>2. Let care be had that the Worship of God be practised,
and Discipline exercised in Families, according to the Directory
for Family Worship in all things as was appointed in the General
Assembly 1647. especially in the Ministers constant Catechizing
of the Family, and in the performance of the Duties
of the Sabbath by all the Members thereof.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>3. Let Persons to be married, and who have Children to be
baptized, who are very rude and ignorant, be stirred up and
exhorted, as at all times, so especially at that time, to attain
some measure of Christian knowledge in the grounds of Religion,
that they may give to the Minister, before the Elder of
the Bounds wherein they live, some accompt of their knowledge
that so they may the better teach their family and train up their
Children.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>4. Let every Family that hath any in it than can read, have
a Bible and a Psalm-book, and make use of them; and where
none can read, let them be stirred up to traine up their children
in reading, and use any other good remedie the Minister and
Session can fall on.</hi>
</p>

<p>
General Ecclesiastick Remedies.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>1. Let the Remedies which were given at Perth 1645.
and are mentioned in the General Assembly 1646. anent the
Sins of Ministers be put in execution.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>2. Let suspension from the Lords Sacrament be more carefully
executed.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>3. Let Persons relapse in Adultery (or above) quadrilapse
in fornication (or above) or often guilty of other grosser scandals,
be Excommunicat somewhat more summarly nor in
an ordinary processe (except there be more nor ordinary signes,
and an eminent measure of Repentance made known to the
Session and Presbyterie) both for the hainousness of the sins and
continuance therein, and also for terrour to others; And
these not to be relaxed from the sentence of Excommunication
without evidence, and undeniable signes of Repentance.</hi>
</p>

<pb n="426"/><anchor id="Pg426"/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>4. Let unpartial proceeding be used against men of all quality,
for their scandalous walking, and in particular for
drunkenesse, swearing, and other scandalous sins. And
this to be tryed at the Visitation of Kirk.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Particular Ecclesiastick Remedies.
</p>

<p>
And 1. against ignorance.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>1. Let Ministers Catechise one day every week (whereon
also they may Baptise and Lecture or Preach) and let them
preach every Lords Day both before and after noon, according
to former Acts of General Assemblies, Let Presbyteries
and Synods be very careful of this; And let every Provincial
Book, contain an exact accompt thereof.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>2. Let Ministers examine all of every quality of whose
knowledge they have no certain notice.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>3. Let young Persons be Catechized by the Minister from
the time they are capable of instruction, and let them not be
delayed till they be of age to Communicat.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>4. Let Persons grossly ignorant be debarred from the Communion;
for the first and second time, let them be debarred,
suppressing their names; for the third time, expressing their
names; for the fourth time, bring them to publick repentance;
all this is to be understood of those that profit nothing, and
labours not for knowledge: But if they be profiting in any
measure, or labouring that they may profit, their case is
very considerable, they ought to have more forbearance.</hi>
</p>

<p>
2. Ecclesiastick Remedies against Prophanesse.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>1. Let ignorant and scandalous Persons be put off, and
kept off Kirk Sessions.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>2. Let every Elder have a certain bounds assigned to him
that he may visit the same every moneth at least, and report to
the Session what scandals and abuses are therein, or what
persons have entered without Testimonials.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>3. Let all scandalous persons be suspended from the Lords
Supper.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>4. Let the Minister deal in private with them that are professing
publick Repentance before the Elder of the bounds, thus
to try the evidence of their Repentance.</hi>
</p>

<pb n="427"/><anchor id="Pg427"/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>5. Let these who have fallen in Fornication make publick
profession of Repentance three several Sabbaths, who is guilty
of relapse in Fornication six Sabbaths, who is guilty of relapse
in Fornication, or hath once fallen in Adultery, 26. Sabbaths,
and these sins to be confessed both in one</hi> viz. <hi rend='italic'>in Sackcloth,
Quadrilapse in Fornication and relapse in Adultery,
three quarters of a Year, Incest or Murder a Year, or 52.
Sabbaths, in case the Magistrate do not his duty in punishing
such crimes capitally; They that fall in Fornication or relapses
therein, are first to confesse their Sin before the Session,
and thereafter before the Congregation; They that are guilty
of greater degrees of that Sin and of the other Sins mentioned in
this Article, are to confess their Sin both before the Session &amp;
Presbyterie, and there to shew some signes of Repentance before
they be brought to the Congregation.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>6. Some are to be rebuked at the time of Catechising, who
deserve more nor a privase reproof, and yet needs not to be
brought to publick Repentance.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>7. It will be a good remedie against Sabbath-breaking by
Carriers and Travellers, That the Ministers where they dwell
cause them to bring Testimonials from the place where they
rested on these Lords dayes wherein they were from home.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>8. Let all Persons who flit from one Paroch to another have
sufficient Testimonials, This is to be extended to all Gentlemen
and Persons of quality and all their followers, who come
to reside with their Families at</hi> Edinburgh, <hi rend='italic'>or elswhere, and let
the Minister from whom they flit, advertise the Minister to whom
they flit, if (to his knowledge) they be lying under any scandal.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>9. Let Ministers be free with Persons of quality for amendment
of their faults, and (if need shall be) let them take help
thereto of some of the Brethren of the Presbyterie.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>10. Let the Presbyteries take special notice of Ministers
who do converse frequently and familiarly with Malignants,
and with scandalous and prophane Persons, especially such as
belongs to other Paroches.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>11. Let privie Censures of Presbyteries and Synods be performed
with more Accuracie, Diligence and Zeal.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>12. For better keeping of the Sabbath, let every Elder take
notice of such as are within his bounds, how they keep the
<pb n="428"/><anchor id="Pg428"/>
Kirk, how the time is spent before, betwixt, and after the
time of publick Worship.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>13. Let no Minister resort to any Excommunicate person
without licence from the Presbyterie</hi> nisi in extremis, <hi rend='italic'>and let
Ministers take special notice of such persons as haunt with Excommunicants,
and processe them.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>14. Frequent correspondence betwixt presbyteries is a good
remedie.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>15. At the visitation of each Congregation, let the Session
Book be well visited, and for that effect, let it be delivered
to two or three Brethren seven or eight dayes before the visitation,
that their report of it may be in readinesse against the
Day of Visitation.</hi>
</p>

<p>
The Assembly allows of all these Overtures and Remedies
of the Sins of the Land; And Ordains all of them to be carefully
and conscionably put in practise.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act for examining the Paraphrase of the
Psalms and other Scripturall Songs.</hi></head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly Appoints <hi rend='italic'>Rouse</hi> Paraphrase
of the Psalms, with the corrections thereof now given
in by the persons appointed by the last Assembly for
that purpose, to be sent to Presbyteries, That they may
carefully revise and examine the same, and thereafter send
them with their corrections to the Commission of this Assembly
to be appointed for publick affairs, Who are to have
a care to cause reexamine the Animadversions of Presbyteries,
and prepare a report to the next Generall Assembly;
Intimating hereby, That if Presbyteries be negligent hereof
the next General Assembly is to go on &amp; take the same Paraphrase
to their consideration without more delay: And the
Assembly Recommends to Master <hi rend='italic'>John Adamson</hi> and Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>Thomas Crafurd</hi> to revise the Labours of Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>Zachary Boyd</hi> upon
the other Scripturall Songs, and to prepare a report thereof
to the said Commission for publick affairs, That after their
<pb n="429"/><anchor id="Pg429"/>
examination, the same may be also reported to the next
Generall Assembly.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Overtures concerning Papists, their children,
and Excommunicate Persons.</hi></head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly considering the manifold inconveniences
that follow upon the sending of the children
of Noblemen and others of quality to Forraign Countries
wherein Popery is professed, especially that thereby such
children are in perill to be corrupted with Popery, and so
corrupt these Families and Persons to which they belong,
whereby that wicked root of damnable Idolatry, Errour and
Heresie may again be occasioned to spring up and trouble
many, and provoke the most High GOD to wrath, and
to cause his Majestie leave this Land to strong delusions to
believe lies; Therefore They Do in the name of GOD,
Charge and Require all the Presbyteries of this Kingdom to
observe and practice the Rules and Directions which are
made in former Generall Assemblies for preventing of the
said fearfull inconveniences, and namely the Overtures against
Papists, non-Communicants, and Profaners of the
Sabbath approven in the Generall Assembly held at St. <hi rend='italic'>Andrews</hi>
in the year of God, 1642. and the Act anent children
sent without the Kingdom made in the Generall Assembly
at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh, Anno 1646.</hi> And that they use all diligence
for putting in execution the Acts of Parliament and secret
Councell made against Papists &amp; Excommunicate Persons;
And that they register their diligences thereanent in their
Presbyterie Booke which are summarily to be recorded in
the Synod Books from time to time, That the Generall
Assembly may see how these laudable Acts are put in execution,
which here are presented with some necessary additions
in one view.
</p>

<p>
1. That every Presbyterie give a List of all Excommunicate
Papists they know to be within their bounds to the
<pb n="430"/><anchor id="Pg430"/>
Commissioners of the Generall Assembly, and of all Papists;
yea of them also who professe to have renounced Popery,
but yet have their children educated abroad, with the
names of these children that are abroad, according to the
fifth Overture of the Generall Assembly, 1642.
</p>

<p>
2. That every Presbyterie conveen at their first meeting
all known Papists within their bounds, and such as having
professed to renounce Popery have their children abroad,
and cause them finde sufficient caution for bringing home
within three moneths such of their children as are without
the Kingdom; to be educated in Schools and Colledges at
the Presbyteries sight if they be Minors; and to be wrought
upon by gracious conference, &amp; other means of instruction
to be reclaimed from Popery if they be come to perfect
age.
</p>

<p>
3. The Parents, Tutors or Frinds of Children and
Minors shall, before they send them without the Kingdom,
first acquaint the Presbyterie where they reside, that they
may have their Testimoniall directed to the Presbyterie or
Classe within the Kingdom or Dominion beyond Seas
whither they intend to send their Children; And at the time
of these Childrens return, that they report a Testimoniall
from the Presbyterie or Synod where they lived without the
Kingdom, to the Presbyterie who gave them a Testimonial
at their going away, according to the Act anent Children sent
without the Kingdom <hi rend='italic'>Anno 1646.</hi>
</p>

<p>
4. That all Presbyteries give the names of such Pædagogs
as were abroad with the children of Noblemen within there
bounds, and diligently enquire whether these Pædagogs do
continue stedfast in the true Religion, and continue in their
service, or whither these Pædagogs do either become
corrupt in Religion, or (continuing constant) are removed
from their charge and by whom they are removed, and that
they signifie these things to the Generall Assembly from
time to time or their Commissioners, That they may represent
the same to the High Court of Parliament, Lords of
secret Counsell or Committe of Estates, for such remedie
as shall seem expedient to their Honours, for preventing of
and purging the land from the plague of Idolatrie.
</p>

<pb n="431"/><anchor id="Pg431"/>

<p>
5. That such Parents, Tutors or Friends as either send
away Children to forraign parts infected with Idolatry without
such Testimonialls as aforesaid, or do not recall them
who are already abroad within such time as is above prefixed,
or do remove from them their Protestant Pædagogs (that
they may the more easily be infected with Popery) be processed
and in case of not amending these things, be Excommunicated.
</p>

<p>
6. That the names of such as are Excommunicated for
these or any other causes, be sent in to the Generall Assembly
from year to year, that (from thence) their names may
be notified in all the Kingdom, and that the Acts of Parliament
and secret Counsell may be put to execution against
them, and all diligence used for that effect; and that by the
effectuall dealing of the Generall Assembly, with the Parliament,
Lords of secret Counsell, or Committee of Estates,
their Lordships may Enact such further, just and severe
civill Punishment on such Excommunicants for Terror to
others, as shall be found necessary for purging this Covenanted
Land from all Abominations.
</p>

<p>
Because persons addicted to Idolatry will use all means
for their own hardening in their Superstitious and Idolatrous
way, even within the Countrey; Therefore all known
Papists, or persons suspect of Poperie upon probable grounds
are to finde Caution before their Presbyteries, for their abstinence
from Masse, and from the Company of all Jesuits,
and Priests according to the second Overture against Papists,
made <hi rend='italic'>Anno 1642.</hi> Also Presbyteries are to presse them to
finde such Caution; And to observe what persons put their
Sons or Daughters to such Families as are tainted with Popery
within the Land, the same being a speciall mean to
corrupt them with Idolatry, And to cause such Parents
recall their Children, or else proceed with the Censures of
the Kirk against them.
</p>

<p>
All which Overtures, Presbyteries are seriously required
and Ordained to observe diligently with Certification,
That they shall be severely censured, If they shall be found
remisse or negligent in any of these points, which are so
<pb n="432"/><anchor id="Pg432"/>
necessary for keeping of the Lords House and People unpoluted
with Error, Idolatry, or Superstition.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Aug. 11. 1648 <hi rend='italic'>Antemeridiem,</hi> Sess. 39.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act for prosecuting the Treaty for the Uniformity
in Religion in the Kingdom of England.</hi></head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly, Taking to their consideration
that the Treaty of Uniformity in Religion in all His Majesties
Dominions is not yet perfected; Therefore, Renews
the power and Commission granted by preceeding Assemblies
for prosecuting that Treaty unto these Persons after-named
<hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi> Mr <hi rend='italic'>Robert Douglas</hi>, Mr
<hi rend='italic'>Samuel Rutherford</hi>, Mr <hi rend='italic'>Robert Baillie</hi>, Mr
<hi rend='italic'>George Gillespie</hi>, Ministers. And <hi rend='italic'>John
Earle of</hi> Cassils, <hi rend='italic'>John Lord Balmerinoch</hi>, and Sir.
<hi rend='italic'>Arch. Johnston
of Wariston</hi> Elders; Authorizing them with full power to
prosecute the said Treaty of Uniformity with the Honourable
Houses of the Parliament of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, and the Reverend
Assembly of Divines there, or any Committees Appointed
by them: And to do all and every thing which may advance,
perfect, and bring that Treaty to an happie conclusion,
conform to the Commissions given thereanent.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act Renewing the Commission for the publick
Affairs of this Kirk.</hi></head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly Taking to their consideration,
that in respect the great work of Uniformity in Religion
in all his Majesties Dominions is not yet perfected (though
by the Lords blessing there is a good progress made in the
same) There is a necessity of renewing the Commissions
granted formerly for prosecuting and perfecting
that great Work; Do therefore Renew the Power and
Commission granted for the Publick Affairs of the Kirk by
the Generall Assemblies held at Saint <hi rend='italic'>Andrews</hi>, 1642. and
<pb n="433"/><anchor id="Pg433"/>
at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi> 1643. 1644. 1645. 1646. and 1647. unto the
persons following <hi rend='italic'>viz</hi> Masters, <hi rend='italic'>John Lawder,
Andrew Wood, David Calderwood, Robert Ker, John Mackghie, John Knox,
John Sinclar, John Adamson, Robert Dowglas, George Gillespie,
James Hamiltoun, Mungo Law, John Smith, Robert Lawrie,
George Lesly, John Weir, Robert Eliot, Alexander Dickson,
Patrick Fleeming, Thomas Vassie, Ephraim Melvil, Hew Kennedie,
Kenneth Logie, Alexander Levistoun, George Bennet,
David Weems, William Row, Robert Young, William Menzies,
John Friebaine, John Givan, Harie Guthrie, Andrew
Rind, David Auchterlony, Samuel Ousteen, Thomas Henderson,
Charles Archibald, Andrew Lawder, John Leviston, John Macklellan,
Alexander Turnbull, William Fullerton, George Hutcheson, John
Genell, Patrick Colvill, James Ferguson, Hew Peebles, John
Hamiltoun, Alexander Dunlope, David Elphiston, David Dickson,
Robert Baillie, Robert Ramsay, Patrick Gillespie, Patrick
Sharpe, James Nasunth, John Home, Evan Camron, Robert
Blair, Samuel Rutherfurd, David Forret, Robert Traill, Andrew
Bennett, Walter Greg, John Macgill younger, John Moncreiff,
Fredrick Carmichael, John Chalmers, John Duncan,
Andrew Donaldson, Will Oliphant, George Simmer, Andrew
Affleck, Arthur Granger, David Strachen, Andrew Cant, John
Rex, John Paterson, Alexander Cant, John Young, John Seaton,
David Lindsay</hi> at Bethelvie, <hi rend='italic'>Nothaniel Martine, John
Annand, William Falconer, Joseph Brodie, Alexander Summer,
William Chalmer, Gilbert Anderson, David Rosse, George Gray,
Robert Knox, William Penman, James Guthrie, Thomas Donaldson,
William Jameson, Thomas Wilkie, James Ker, John Knox,
Andrew Dunkanson</hi> Ministers: <hi rend='italic'>Archibald</hi> Marques of Argyle,
<hi rend='italic'>Alexander</hi> Earle of Eglintoun, <hi rend='italic'>John</hi> Earle of
Cassils. <hi rend='italic'>William</hi> Earle of Lothian,
<hi rend='italic'>Archibald</hi> Lord Angus, <hi rend='italic'>William</hi> Lord
Borthwick, <hi rend='italic'>John</hi> Lord Torphichen, <hi rend='italic'>John</hi> Lord
Balmerino, <hi rend='italic'>Robert</hi> Lord Burly, <hi rend='italic'>James</hi> Lord
Couper, Lord Kilcudbright, <hi rend='italic'>Alexander</hi> Lord Elcho, Sir
<hi rend='italic'>Archibald Johnstoun</hi> of Wariston. Sir <hi rend='italic'>John
Hope</hi> of Craighall, <hi rend='italic'>Arthur Erskin</hi>
of Scotskraig, Sir <hi rend='italic'>John Moncreiff</hi> of that Ilk,
<hi rend='italic'>Boaton</hi> of Creigh, Sir <hi rend='italic'>John Wauchhope</hi> of
Midrie, Sir <hi rend='italic'>Thomas Ruthven</hi> of Frieland, Sir
<hi rend='italic'>George Maxwell</hi> of Netherpollock, Sir <hi rend='italic'>James
Fraser</hi> of Brae, Sir <hi rend='italic'>James Hackact</hi> of Pitfirn, Sir
<pb n="434"/><anchor id="Pg434"/>
<hi rend='italic'>William Carmichaell</hi> younger of that ilk, <hi rend='italic'>Walter
Dundas</hi> younger of that ilk, <hi rend='italic'>Thomas Craig</hi> of Ricarton, Mr
<hi rend='italic'>George Winrain</hi> of Liberton, Sir <hi rend='italic'>Alexander
Ingils</hi> of Ingilston, <hi rend='italic'>Alexander Brodie</hi> of that ilk,
<hi rend='italic'>Forbes</hi> of Eight, <hi rend='italic'>Will. More</hi> of Glanderston,
<hi rend='italic'>John Ker</hi> of Lochtour, <hi rend='italic'>Alex Pringill</hi> of
Whitbanck, <hi rend='italic'>Walter Scot</hi> of Whitstyid, <hi rend='italic'>John
Crafurd</hi> of Crafurdland, Sir <hi rend='italic'>John Chisly</hi> of Carswell,
<hi rend='italic'>Robert Monroe</hi> of Obsteall, <hi rend='italic'>Cornwall</hi> of
Bonhard, <hi rend='italic'>George Dundas</hi> of Dudingston, Sir <hi rend='italic'>James
Stewart</hi> of Kirkfield, <hi rend='italic'>Alexander Colvil</hi> of the Blair, Mr
<hi rend='italic'>Alex. Petrson</hi>, Mr <hi rend='italic'>Robert Burnet</hi> younger,
Mr <hi rend='italic'>Thomas Murray, George Potterfield,</hi> Mr <hi rend='italic'>James
Campbell, James Hamilton, Lawrence Henderson,</hi> Mr <hi rend='italic'>Robert
Barcclay</hi>, Mr <hi rend='italic'>William More, William Glendoning</hi> Doctor,
<hi rend='italic'>Douglas, James Sword, Gideon Lack</hi>, Mr <hi rend='italic'>Dongall
Campbell, John Besrall, John Brown, William
Brown, Robert Brown</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>William Russel</hi>, Elders:
Giving unto them full Power and Commission, to do all
and every thing for preservation of the Established Doctrine,
Discipline, Worship and Government of this Kirk, against
all who shall endeavour to introduce any thing contrary
thereunto, and for prosecuting, advancing, perfecting &amp;
bringing the said Work of Uniformity in Religion in all His
Majesties Dominions to a happy conclusion, conform to the
former Commissions granted by proceeding Assemblies thereanent,
And to that effect Appoints them, or any seventeen
of them, whereof thirteen shall be Ministers to meet
here in this City to morrow the 12. of this Moneth, And
thereafter upon the last Wednesday of <hi rend='italic'>November, February</hi>,
and <hi rend='italic'>May</hi> next, and upon any other day, and in any other
place they shall think fit. Renewing also to the persons before
named the power contained in the Act of the Assembly
1643. Intituled, A <hi rend='italic'>Reference to the Commission anent the
Persons designed to repair to the Kingdom of England.</hi> And further,
incase Delinquents have no constant residence in any
one Presbyterie, or if Presbyteries be negligent or overawed,
in these cases, The Assembly gives to the persons
before named, such power of censuring complyers and
persons disaffected to the Covenant according to the Acts of
the Assembly, declaring alwayes and providing, that
Ministers shall not be deposed, but in one of the quarterly
<pb n="435"/><anchor id="Pg435"/>
meetings of this Commission, And further Authorises
them as formerly with full power to make Supplications,
Remonstrances, Declarations &amp; Warnings to Indict Fasts &amp;
Thanksgivings as there shall be cause to Protest against all
encroachments upon the Liberties of the Kirk, and to censure
all such as interupt this Commission or any other Church
Judicatory, or the execution of their Censures or of any
other Sentences or Acts, issuing from them, And with full
power to them to treat and determine in the matters referred
unto them by this Assembly, as fully and freely as if the
same were here fully expressed, and with as ample power
as any Commission of any former Generall Assemblies hath
had or been in use of before: Declaring also that all opposers
of the authority of this Commission in matters intrusted
to them shall be holden as opposers of the authority of the
Generall Assembly, And this Commission in their whole
proceedings are comptable to, and censurable by the next
General Assembly.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>August 11. 1643. <hi rend='italic'>Postmeridiem,</hi> Sess. 40.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Exemption of</hi> Murray, Rosse, <hi rend='italic'>and</hi>
Caithnesse <hi rend='italic'>from the contribution granted to the boyes of</hi> Argyle,
<hi rend='italic'>with a Recommendation to Presbyteries,
to make up what is taken of them
by that exemption.</hi></head>

<p>
Concerning the overtture and desire of the Commissioners
of the Presbyteries of <hi rend='italic'>Murray</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Rosse</hi>,
and <hi rend='italic'>Caithnesse</hi> for
an exemption from that contribution of fourty shillings
recommended for entertainment of the <hi rend='italic'>Irish</hi> boyes in
<hi rend='italic'>Argyle</hi>;
The Assembly having considered thereof, and of their
offer in the the name of the said Presbyteries, if that exemption
be granted, Do Approve their offer, And Therefore
hereby Exoners the said Presbyteries of the said contribution
of fourty shillings toward the entertainment of
<pb n="436"/><anchor id="Pg436"/>
the boyes in <hi rend='italic'>Argyle</hi>, And Ordains for that exemption according
to the offer of their said Commissioners, that each
Presbyterie of the said Provinces entertaine one of the <hi rend='italic'>Irish</hi>
language at Schooles, and if any be found already fit for
Colledges, they shall maintain them at Philosophie, and so
forward, untill they be fit for the Ministery: And Because
by this exemption the contribution for the boyes in <hi rend='italic'>Argyle</hi>
will be so much lessened. Therefore the Assembly Recommends
to all other Presbyteries to think upon some way
how by the charitable Supply that may be made up unto
them.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act concerning Collection for the Poor.</hi></head>

<p>
The Assembly Understanding that the collection
for the poor in some Kirks in the Countrey, are taken
in the time of Divine Service, which being, a
very great and unseemly disturbance of Divine Worship
Do therefore hereby Inhibit and discharge the same. And ordains
that the Minister and Session appoint some other way
and time for receiving the said Collections.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Recommendation for securing provisions to
Ministers in Burghs.</hi></head>

<p>
In regard that the stipends of many Ministers in Burghs are
not secured unto them and their successors; Therefore
the Assembly Do seriously Recommend to the Honourable
Commission of Parliament for planting of Kirks, to provide
reall and valide security of competent and honest meanes
to the present Ministers of Burghs and their successors;
where they are not sufficiently provided or secured already;
Ordaining Presbyteries to use all necessary diligence for
prosecuting thereof before the said Commission for planting
Kirks.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="437"/><anchor id="Pg437"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>The Humble Supplication of the Generall Assembly
of the Kirk of</hi> Scotland, <hi rend='italic'>met at</hi> Edinburg
August 12 <hi rend='italic'>unto the Kings Most
Excellent Majeste.</hi></head>

<p>
Albeit your Majestie through the suggestions of evil men,
may haply entertain hard thoughts of us and our Proceedings,
yet the Searcher of hearts knowes, and our consciences
bear record unto us, that we bear in our spirits these
humble and duitifull respects to your Majestie, that loyall
subjects owe to their native Soveraigne, and that it would
be one of our greatest contentments upon earth, to see your
Majestie reigning for the LORD, in Righteousnesse and
Peace over these Nations: And therefore as we do bow our
knees daily before the Throne of Grace on your behalf, and
the behalf of your Posterity; So we finde our selves as heretofore,
obliged faithfully and freely to warn your Majestie of
your danger and dutie; Wishing, and hoping that the Lord
will incline your Royall heart, from the sence of the evil
which hath befallen You, through the slighting of former
Warning, to be more attentive unto this. We are very
sensible of your Majesties suffering, and low condition,
and do not in the least measure approve but from our hearts
abhorre any thing that hath been done to your Majesties
Person, contrary to the common resolutions of both Kingdoms:
Yet it shall be your Majesties wisdom, in this as in
all that hath befallen you these years past, to read the righteous
hand of the Lord, writing bitter things against you,
as for all your Provocations, so especially for resisting his
Work, and authorising by your Commissions the shedding
of the blood of his People, for which it is high time to
repent, that there be no more wrath against you and your
Realms.
</p>

<p>
The Commission of the preceding Assembly, whose
proceedings are unanimously approven by this Assembly,
Having read your Majesties Letter of the date at <hi rend='italic'>Carisbrook</hi>
Castle, <hi rend='italic'>December 27.</hi> And perused your Concessions, did
<pb n="438"/><anchor id="Pg438"/>
finde some of these Concessions destructive to the Covenant,
and all or them unsatisfactorie, and did therefore emit a
Declaration concerning the same, least your Majesties Subjects
in this Kingdom should have unawares imbarked
themselves in an Engagement upon grounds not consisting
with the good of Religion, and the Solemn League and
Covenant. For preventing whereof, they did also present
most just and necessary desires unto the high and Honourable
Court of Parliament of this Kingdom; which, if they
had been granted, might have through the Blessing of God,
either procured (upon Treaty) your Majesties re-establishment,
and a solide Peace, or laid open the expedience and
necessity of a lawfull War, and have united this Kingdom
therein for the good of Religion, of your Majestie, and of
your Kingdoms. When the Parliament was pleased without
satisfaction to any of these desires, to go on towards
the determining of a War upon the grounds contained in their
Declaration, As many of their own Members who have
been faithfull in the Cause of GOD from the beginning,
did dissent from their preceedings, so most of all the Presbyteries
and Synods of this Kingdom, and the Committees
of War in severall Shires did by humble Supplication represent
to the Parliament, how unsatisfied they were in their
consciences concerning the present Engagement: Notwithstanding
of all which, the Engagement hath been carried
on without clearing either of the lawfulnesse or necessity
thereof. Therefore, We having now examined the same
by the Rule of Gods Word, and having found it unlawfull,
as we have warned the whole Kingdom of the danger thereof,
So we hold it our Duty also to warne your Majestie as
the Servants of the most High GOD, and in Name of the
Lord <hi rend='italic'>Jesus Christ</hi>, who must Judge the quick and dead, Earnestly
beseeching your Majestie that as ye would not draw
new guilt upon your Majesties Throne, and make these
Kingdoms again a field of Blood, you would be far from owning
or having any hand in this so unlawfull an Engagement;
Which as it hath already been the cause of so much sorrow
and many sufferings to the People of God in this Land, who
choose affliction rather then sin, So it tendeth to the undoing
<pb n="439"/><anchor id="Pg439"/>
of the Covenant and Work of Reformation: As we do
not oppose the restitution of your Majestie to the exercise of
your Royall Power; So we must needs desire that that
which is GODS be given unto Him in the first place, and
that Religion may be secured before the setling of any humane
interest; Being confident that this way is not only
most for the Honour of GOD, but also for your Majesties
Honor and Safety. And therefore as it was one of our Desires
to the High and Honourable Court of Parliament that
they would solicitie your Majestie for securing of Religion,
and establishing the Solemn League and Covenant in all your
Dominions, that your Majestie might know what they
intend on your behalf was with a subordination to Religion;
So we do now from our selves make this humble address
unto your Majestie, intreating your Majestie as you tender
Truth and Peace, you would be pleased to suffer your self
to be possessed with right thoughts of the League and Covenant,
and of the proceedings of your Majesties loyall
Subjects in relation thereunto, and give your Royall assent
for injoyning of it in all your Dominions. If your Majestie
had been pleased to hearken to our Counsell heranent some
years ago, the blood of many thousands, which now lyes
upon your Majesties Throne, might have been spared,
Popery, Prelacy, Idolatry, Superstition, Profanesse,
Heresie, Error, Sects, and Schismes which are now grown
to so great a height in <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, might have been extirpate,
and your Majestie sitting in Peace in your own House, Reigning
over your Subjects with much mutuall contentment
and confidence. And if your Majestie shall yet search out
and repent of all your secret and open Sins, And after so
many dear-bought experiences of the danger of evill Counsell,
be now so wise as to avoid it, and to hearken to us
speaking unto you in the Name of the Lord, We are confident
by this means your Majestie may yet be restored, and
a sure and firme peace procured. We take it as a great
mercy, and as a door of hope, that God still inclines the
hearts of all his Servants to pray for your Majestie; And we
would not have your Majestie to look upon it as a light
thing, that you have been preserved alive, when many
<pb n="440"/><anchor id="Pg440"/>
thousands have by your means and procurement fallen on
your right hand and on
your left hand. God forbid that your Majestie should any
longer dispise the word of exhortation, the riches of his
goodnesse, forbearance and long suffering, not knowing
that the goodnesse of God leads you unto Repentance;
For if your Majestie do so, As we are afraid, all
Counsels and Endeavours for your Majesties re-establishment
shall be in vain and without successe, because of the
Wrath of the Lord of Hosts, who brings down the mighty
from his Throne, and scatters the proud in the imaginations
of their hearts; So we shall mourn in secret for it, and for
all the miseries that are like to come upon your Throne and
your Dominions, and comfort our selves, in this, that
we have delivered our own souls. But we desire to hope
better things, and that your Majestie will humble your self
under the mighty hand of God, and be inclined to hearken
to the faithfull advise of his Servants, be willing to secure
Religion, and imploy your Royall Power for advancing
the Kingdom of the Son of God, which will turn as
well to the Honour and Happinesse of your Majesties as to
the Peace and Safety of your Subjects.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>August. 12. 1648, Sess. <hi rend='italic'>Ult.</hi></head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act discharging Duels.</hi></head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly taking in consideration the
many Duels and combats that have been fought, and
Challenges that have been made, and carried, and received
in this Land of late. And being sensible of the exceeding
great offence that comes by so horrible and hainous a sin;
which is a grosse preferring of the supposed credit of the
Creature unto the Honour of the most High God, and an
usurpation upon the office of the Magistrate by private mens
taking of the Sword, And a High degree of murther both
of body and soul, by shedding the blood of the one, and
cutting of the other from time of repenting; And which
<pb n="441"/><anchor id="Pg441"/>
doth ordinarily produce many wofull consequents, Therefore
doth enact And Ordain that all Persons of whatsoever
quality who shall either fight Duels, or make, or write, or
receive, or with their knowledge carry Challenges, or go
to the fields, either as Principals, or as Seconds to fight
Duels and Combats, that they shall without respect of Persons
be processed with the Censures of the Kirk and brought
before the Congregation two severall Lords-dayes; In the
first whereof they are sharply to be rebuked and convinced
of the hainousnesse of their sin and offence, and on the next
to make a solemn publick Confession thereof, and profession
of their unfained Humiliation and Repentance for the same.
And if the Person guilty of any of the former offences be an
Elder or Deacon, he is to be removed from his office, and
whatsoever person guilty of any of these offences, shall refuse
to give obedience according to the tenour of this Act, shall
be processed to Excommunication: Declaring always, that
if any be killed at such Duels, the killer shall be proceeded
against by the Kirk as other murtherers.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act concerning deposed Ministers.</hi></head>

<p>
The Assembly considering that divers Ministers deposed
for Malignancy, and complying with the Enemies
of this Kirk and Cause of God, may be suited
by, and hope to get entry in some Congregation where a
Minister deposed for Malignancy hath been, and may be
supposed to have put on the people a stamp and impression of
Malignancie, and being by the Act of the Generall Assembly
in <hi rend='italic'>Anno 1645.</hi> Past all hope of being restored to the
place out of the whilk he was cast: Now also Ordains and
enacts that no Minister deposed for Malignancy and compliance
foresaid (when it shall fall out that he be put in a
capacity of admission to the Ministry) shall enter into the
Congregation of any other Minister who also hath been deposed
for Malignancy and complyance, as said is.
</p>

<pb n="442"/><anchor id="Pg442"/>

<p>
The Generall Assembly not having now time to consider
the References of the preceeding Assemblies, and
the most part of Presbyteries not having lent their opinions
in Writ, Therefore do yet again Recommend to Presbyteries
and Provinciall Assemblies to consider all matters
referred by this or by any former Assemblies, and to send
their opinions therein in writ to the next Generall Assembly.
</p>

</div>

<div>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The meeting of the next Generall Assembly is
hereby Appointed to be at</hi> Edinburgh <hi rend='italic'>the first</hi> Wednesday
<hi rend='italic'>of</hi> Iuly, 1649.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>A. Ker.</hi>
</p>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<pb n="443"/><anchor id="Pg443"/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>The Generall Assembly, Holden at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh,
July 7. 1649.</hi></head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>July 7. 1649. Antemeridiem, Sess 4.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Approbation of the proceedings of the Commissioners
of the Generall Assembly.</hi></head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly having heard the report
of the Committe appointed for revising the proceedings
of the Commissioners of the preceding
Assembly; And finding thereby, that in all
their proceedings they have been zealous, diligent
and faithfull, in the discharge of the trust committed
to them, do therefore unanimously Approve and Ratify the
the whole proceedings, Acts and Conclusions of the said
Commission; Appointing Mr <hi rend='italic'>John Bell</hi>
Moderator <hi rend='italic'>protempore</hi>,
to return them hearty thanks in the name the Assembly, for
their great pains, travel and fidelity.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n="444"/><anchor id="Pg444"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>July 10. 1649. <hi rend='italic'>Antemeridiem,</hi> Sess. 6.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Approbation of the Commissioners sent to his
Majesty.</hi></head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly having taken in serious consideration
the Report of the Travels and proceedings
of the Commissioners sent to his Majesty presented by
them this day, Together with the Commission and Instructions
which were given unto them; Do finde by the Report,
that they have been very diligent and faithfull in the discharge
of the Trust committed to then. And therefore
doe unanimously Approve of their Carriage and return them
hearty thanks for their great Pains and Travails in that Employment.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>July 19. 1649 <hi rend='italic'>Postmeridiem,</hi> Sess. 18.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act discharging promiscuous Dancing.</hi></head>

<p>
The Assembly finding the scandall and abuse that arises
through promiscuous Dancing: Do therefore inhibite
and discharge the same, and do referre the Censure
thereof to the severall Presbyteries, recommending it to
their care and diligence.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>July 20. 1649. <hi rend='italic'>Antemeridiem,</hi> Sess. 19.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act concerning the receiving of Engagers in
the late unlawfull War against</hi> England, <hi rend='italic'>to publick
Satisfaction, Together with the Declaration
and Acknowledgement to be subscribed
by them.</hi></head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly considering what great offence
against God, and Scandall to his People at home and abroad,
<pb n="445"/><anchor id="Pg445"/>
hath arisen from the late unlawfull Engagement in
War against <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>; whereby, contrary to the Law of God
and of Nations, contrary to the Solemn League and Covenant,
contrary to the Petitions of almost the whole Kingdom,
contrary to the Declarations of the Judicatories of
this Kirk, contrary to the Protestations of a considerable
part of the Parliament, contrary to the frequent and clear
Warnings of the Servants of God in his name, not only an
Association in Counsels and Arms was made with Malignant
Persons, who had formerly shewn their disaffection to the
Covenant in and Cause, but are Invasion of the Neighbour
Nation was prosecuted; from whence flowed the oppression
of the Persons, Estates and consciences of many of the people
of God in this Land, the shedding of the blood of some,
the losse and dishonour of this Nation, and severall other
Inconveniences: and considering that the Commissioners
of the last Generall Assembly, have acquit themselves
faithfully in ordaining to be suspended from the renewing of
the Covenant, and from the Ordinance of the Lords Supper,
such as are designed in their Acts of date the 6. of <hi rend='italic'>October</hi> &amp;
4 of <hi rend='italic'>December</hi> last; referring the further consideration and
censure of the Persons foresaid to this present Generall Assembly:
Therefore the Generall Assembly, for removing
of such Offences, and for prevention of the like in time coming,
and for restoring of such as are truely humbled, do
Declare and Appoint.
</p>

<p>
I. That all those who have been guilty and censured as
aforesaid, and withall do not by their addresses to Kirk Judicatories
testify their dislike thereof, and give evidences of
their Repentance therefore, That these be processed and
continuing obstinate, be excommunicated; But if withall
they go on in premoving Malignant Designes, that they be
forthwith Excommunicated: As also that all such persons
guilty as aforesaid, who after Profession of their Repentance
shall yet again hereafter relapse to the promoting any Malignant
Designe, that these be likewise forth with excommunicated.
</p>

<p>
II. That all these who have been guilty and censured as
aforesaid, and desire to testifie their Repentance, and to be
<pb n="446"/><anchor id="Pg446"/>
admitted to the Covenant and Communion, shall besides
any Confession in publick before the Congregation subscribe
the Declaration herto sub-joyned, of their unfained detestation
and renunciation of that Engagement, and all other
Malignant courses contrary to the Covenant and Cause,
Promising to keep themselves from such ways in time coming,
and acknowledging that if they shall again fall into
such defection thereafter, they may justly be accounted perfidious
backsliders, and breakers of the Covenant and Oath
of God, and proceeded against with the highest Censures of
the Kirk.
</p>

<p>
III. That of these who have been guilty and censured as
aforesaid, and desire now to testifie their Repentance,
Whosoever were formerly joyned in Arms or Counsell with
<hi rend='italic'>James Graham</hi> in his Rebellion, or who were Generall persons
or Colonels in the late unlawfull Engagement, Or
who went to <hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi> to bring over Forces for that effect,
Or who have been eminently active in contriving of or seducing
unto the said Engagement, or whosoever above the
degree of a Leutenant Commanded these parties, that in
promoving of the ends of the said Engagement shed blood
within the Kingdom, either before that Army of Engagers
went to <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, or after their return, Or who above the
degree foresaid Commanded in the late Rebellion in the
North; That none of these be admitted or received to give
satisfaction, but by the Generall Assembly or their Commissioners.
</p>

<p>
IV. That all the rest of these who have been guilty, or
censured as aforesaid may be received by the Presbyteries
where they reside.
</p>

<p>
V. That all who have been guilty as aforsaid, before
their receiving to the Covenant, shall make a Solemn publick
Acknowledgement in such matter, and before such Congregations
as the Commission of the Generall Assembly or
Presbyteries <hi rend='italic'>respectivè</hi> shall prescribe, according to the degree
of their offence and scandall given.
</p>

<p>
VI. That none of the foresaid Persons be admitted, or
received as Elders in any Judicatories of the Kirk, but according
<pb n="447"/><anchor id="Pg447"/>
to the Act of the Generall Assembly of the last of
<hi rend='italic'>August 1647.</hi> against complyers of the first Classe.
</p>

<p>
And because many have heretofore made shew and profession
of their Repentance, who were not convinced of
their guiltinesse nor humbled for the same, but did thereafter
return with the dog to the vomit, and with the sow to
the puddle, unto the mocking of God, and the exceeding
great reproach and detriment of his Cause: Therefore, for
the better determining the Truth and sincerity of the Repentance
of those who desire to be admitted to the Covenant
and Communion: It is appointed and Ordained that none
of those persons who are debarred from the Covenant and
Communion shall be admitted and received thereto, but
such as after exact triall, shall be found for some competent
time before or after the offer of their Repentance, according
to the discretion of the respective Judicatories, to have
in their ordinary conversatione given real Testimony of their
dislike of the late unlawfull Engagement, and of the courses
and wayes of Malignants, and of their sorrow for their
accession to the same; &amp; to live soberly, righteously &amp; godly;
&amp; if any shall be found, who after the defeating of the Engagers
have uttered any Malignant speeches, tending to the
approbation of the late unlawful Engagement, or the blood-shed
within the Kingdome for promoving of the ends of the
said Engagement, or any other projects or practices within
or without the Kingdome; prejudiciall to Religion and the
Covenant, or tending to the reproach of the Ministry, or
the civill Government of the Kingdom, or who have unnecessarily
or ordinarily conversed with Malignant and disaffected
persons, Or who have had hand in, or accession to,
or compliance with or have any wayes countenanced or promoved
any Malignant Design, prejudiciall to Religion and
the Covenant; That these, notwithstanding their profession
of Repentance be not suddenly received, but a competent
time, according to the discretion of the Judicatory, be
assigned to them for tryall of the evidence of their Repentance,
according to the qualifications above mentioned.
And the Generall Assembly Ordains Presbyteries to make
intimation of this Act in the severall Kirks of their bounds so
<pb n="448"/><anchor id="Pg448"/>
soon as they can, after the rising of the General Assembly,
that none pretend ignorance; And that Presbyteries
make accompt of their diligence in prosecuting of this Act
to the Quarterly meetings of the Commission of this Assembly.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>The Declaration and Acknowledgement
before mentioned.</hi></head>

<p>
I, after due consideration
of the late Warre against the Kingdom of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>; And
having also considered the course pursued and promoted by
the Earle of <hi rend='italic'>Lanerk</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>George Monro</hi> and
their Adherents in and about <hi rend='italic'>Stirling</hi>, and by others in the late
Rebellion in the North, against all which not only eminent Testimonies of
Gods Wrath have been given in defeating of them, but
they were in themselves sinfull breaches of Covenant, and
preferring the interest of man unto God; I doe herefore in
Gods sight professe, that I am convinced of the unlawfulnesse
of all these ways, as contrary to the Word of God,
and to the Solemn League and Covenant, not only in regard
of the miscarriages of these that were imployed therein,
but also in respect of the nature of these courses themselves;
And therefore professing my unfained sorrow for my
guiltinesse by my accession to the same, doe renounce and
disclaim the foresaid Engagement and all the courses that
were used for carrying on the same, either before or after the
defeat of the Engagers, as contrary to the Word of GOD
and Solemn League and Covenant, and destructive to Religion
and the work of Reformation; And I doe promise
in the power of the Lords strength, never again to own any
of these or the like courses. And if hereafter at any time, I
shall be found to promote any Malignant Design or course,
that I shall justly be accompted a perfidious Covenant breaker
and despiser of God, and be proceeded against with the
highest Censures of the Kirk: Likeas I doe hereby promise
<pb n="449"/><anchor id="Pg449"/>
to adhere to the Nationall Covenant of this Kingdome
and to the Solemn League and Covenant betwixt the Kingdomes,
and to be honest and zealous for promoving all the
ends thereof, as I shall be called thereunto of God, and to
flee all occasions and temptations that may lead me into
any the like snares against the same.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>July 24. 1649. <hi rend='italic'>Postmeridiem.</hi> Sess. 23.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Letter to the High &amp; Honourable Court of
Parliament.</hi></head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Generall Assembly, Humbly Sheweth,</hi>
</p>

<p>
That whereas we have seen &amp; considered the Act of Parliament
abolishing Patronages, and doe highly commend
the piety and zeal of the Estates of Parliament in promoving
so necessary a point of Reformation, The Generall Assembly
do humbly supplicate, that beside the setling of the
Ministers stipends, that the Tythes mentioned in the said
Act, may be affected with the burthen of pious uses, within
the respective Paroches, conform to a draught of an Act
seen by the Commissioners of the late Generall Assembly
before it pasted in Parliament, And that the foresaid Act,
may be made effectuall for the setling of Ministers Stipends
in Kirks erected, and necessary to be erected according to
the Tenour of the Act of Parliament, And for this effect,
that your Lordships will hasten the sitting of the Commission
for Plantation of Kirks, with all convenient diligence,
and your Lordships Answer.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n="450"/><anchor id="Pg450"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>27. July, 1649. Antemeridiem.</hi> Sess. 27.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>A seasonable and necessary Warning and
Declaration, concerning Present and Imminent dangers,
and concerning duties relating thereto,
from the Generall Assembly of this Kirk,
unto all the Members thereof.</hi></head>

<p>
The Lord who chooses Jerusalem in a furnace of Affliction,
hath been pleased since the beginning of the work
of Reformation in this Land, to exercise his People with
many trials; all that desired to keep a good conscience,
were not long agoe under many heavy and sad pressures
from the insolency and oppression of a prevailing party of
dis-affected and Malignant men, who under a pretext of
bringing the King to a condition of Honour, Freedom and
Safety, did carry on an unlawfull Engagement against the
Kingdom of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>: and if the Lord had not been mercifull
unto his people, they were like either to have been banished
out of the Land, or to have been kept in a perpetuall bondage
in their consciences, persons and estates: But he whose
Messengers those men had mocked, and whose word they
had despised, did bring them down suddenly in a day,
and restored liberty and peace unto his people: A mercy
and deliverance, which as it ought to be remembred with
thankfulnesse and praise, so may it engage our hearts not to
faint in troubles and straites that do yet abide us but to trust
in the name of the Lord, who both can and will deliver us
still out of all our afflictions.
</p>

<p>
Albeit, wee do now enjoy many rich and precious blessing
wherin wee have reason to be comforted, and to rejoyce;
yet it were to shut our own eyes if we should not see our selves
involved in, and threatned with many and great dangers
at home and from abroad, it is matter of exceeding great
sorrow to think upon the ignorance and profanity, the impenitencie
and security that abounds still in the Land, notwithstanding
all the gracious dispensation of the Gospel, and
<pb n="451"/><anchor id="Pg451"/>
means of grace in such purity and plenty, that none of the
Nations round about us can boast of the like, and of all his
sharp rods wherewith he hath afflicted us from year to year,
and of all the mercies and deliverances wherewith he hath
visited us, and of our late solemn confession of sinnes, and
engagement unto duties, sealed with the renewing of the
Covenant and the Oath of God; Which some men have so
far already forgotten, as to return with the dogge to the
vomit, and with the sow to the puddle: And many signes
of inconstancy and levity do appear among all sorts and
ranks of persons, who seem to want nothing but a sutable
tentation to draw them away from their stedfastnesse; Our
Army is not yet sufficiently purged, but there be still in it
Malignant and scandalous men, whose fidelity and constancy,
as it is much to be doubted, so is the wrath of the
Lord to be feared, upon their proceedings and undertakings,
without a speedy and effectuall remedy.
</p>

<p>
That prevailing party of Sectaries in <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, who have
broken the Covenant, and despised the Oath of God, corrupted
the truth, subverted the fundamentall Government,
and taken away the Kings life look upon us with an evill
eye, as upon these who stand in the way of their monstruous
and new fangled devices in Religion and Government;
And though there were no cause to fear any thing from that
party but the Gangrene and infection of those many damnable
and abominable errours which have taken hold on them
yet our vicinity unto and daily commerce with that Nation,
may justly make us afraid that the Lord may give up many in
this Land unto a spirit of delusion to beleeve lies, because
they have not received the love of the truth.
</p>

<p>
Neither is the Malignant party so far broken and brought
low, as that they have abandoned all hopes of carrying on
their former designs against the Covenant and work of Reformation:
Beside many of them in this Kingdom, who
are as Foxes tied in chains, keeping their evill nature, and
waiting an opportuny to break their cords, and again to
prey upon the Lords people, there be standing Armies in
<hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi>, under the command of the Marquesse of
<hi rend='italic'>Ormond</hi>, The Lord <hi rend='italic'>Inchqueen</hi>, the Lord of
<hi rend='italic'>Airds</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>George Munro</hi>,
<pb n="452"/><anchor id="Pg452"/>
who forgetting all the horrible cruelty that was exercised
by the Irish Rebels, upon many thousands of the English
and Scottish Nations in that land, have entred into a
Peace and Association with them, that they may the more
easily carry on the old designes of the Popish, Prelaticall
and Malignant party, And the Lord of <hi rend='italic'>Airds</hi>, and
<hi rend='italic'>George Monro</hi>, have by treachery and oppression brought the
Province of <hi rend='italic'>Ulster</hi>, and Garrisons therein, under their power
and Command, and have redacted our country-men, and
such as adhere unto the Covenant, and cause of God in that
Province, unto many miseries and straits, and are like to
banish the Ministers of the Gospell, and to overturn these
faire beginnings of the work of God, which were unto many
a branch of hope, that the Lord meant to make <hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi> a
pleasant land.
</p>

<p>
But which is more grievous unto us then all these, our
King notwithstanding of the Lords hand against his Fathers
opposition to the work of God, and of the many sad and
dolefull consequences followed thereupon, in reference to
Religion and his Sebjects, and to his person, and Government,
doth hearken unto the councels of these who were
Authors of these miseries to his Royall Father and his Kingdoms:
By which it hath come to passe, that his Majesty
hath hitherto refused to grant the just and necessary desires
of this Kirk and Kingdom, which were tendred unto him
from the Commissioners of both for securing of Religion,
the Liberties of the Subject, his Majesties Government,
and the Peace of the Kingdome; And it is much to be
feared that those wicked Counsellours may so farre prevaile
upon him in his tender yeers, as to engage him in a warre,
for overturning (if it be possible) of the work of God,
and bearing down all those in the three Kingdoms that adhere
thereto: Which if he shall doe, cannot but bring
great wrath from the Lord upon himselfe and his Throne,
and must be the cause of many new, and great miseries, and
calamities to these Lands.
</p>

<p>
It concerns a Nation thus sinfull and loaden with iniquity
and involved in so many difficulties and dangers, by timous
repentance and unfained humiliation to draw near to God,
<pb n="453"/><anchor id="Pg453"/>
and to wrastle with him in Prayer and Supplication, that
our sin may be pardoned, and our iniquity done away, and
that he would establish the Land in the love of the truth
and inable every one in their station to do their duty boldly
and without fear, and in humble dependance upon the
Lord, in whom alone is the salvation of his people; Every
man ought with all faithfulnesse and diligence, to make use
of all these means that are approven and allowed of God,
for preserving and carrying on of his work, and for securing
and guarding the Land against all enemies whatsomever,
both upon the right hand and upon the left.
</p>

<p>
The Spirit of errour and delusion in our Neighbour Land,
in the policy of Satan hath vailed it self in many, under the
mask of holinesse and is in the righteous and wise dispensation
of God, armed with power, and attended with successe:
Therefore all the Inhabitants of this land would labour
for more knowledge, and more love of the truth,
without which they may easily be deceived, audled into
tentation, and would learn to distinguish betwixt the shew
and power of godlinesse. We know that there be many in
<hi rend='italic'>England</hi> who be truly godly, and mourn with us for all the
errours and abominations that are in that land, But it is
without controversie, that that Spirit which hath acted in
the Courses and Counsels of these, who have retarded and
obstructed the work of God, dispised the Covenant, forced
the Parliament, murthered the King, changed the civill
Government, and established so vast a Toleration in Religion,
cannot be the Spirit of Righteousnesse and Holinesse,
because it teaches not men to live godly and righteously, but
drawes them aside into errour and make them to bring forth
the bitter fruits of impiety and iniquity and therefore ought
to be avoyded. And not only are such of our Nation as
travaile in our Neighbour-land, to take heed unto themselves
that they receive not infection from such as are leavened
with Errour, but these also who live at home, especially
in those places where Sectaries, upon pretext of
merchandise, and other civill imployments, ordinarily
traffique and converse. Neither needs any man to be afraid
of the power and successe of that party, Neither needs any
<pb n="454"/><anchor id="Pg454"/>
man to be afraid of the power and successe of that party, they
who have gadded about so much to change their way, shall
ere long be ashamed; The Lord hath rejected their confidences,
and they shall not prosper in them; How farre they
may proceed in their Resolutions and Actings against this
Kingdome, is in the hand of the most high; If the Lord
shall suffer that party to invade this land, it may be the comfort
and incouragement of all the inhabitints thereof, that
not only hath that unlawfull engagement against the Kingdom
of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi> been declared against, and condemned both
by Kirk and State; but also that these men can pretend no
quarrell against us, unlesse it be, that we have adhered unto
the Solemn League and Covenant, from which they have
so foully revolted and backslidden; and that we have borne
testimony against Toleration, and their proceedings in reference
to Religion and Government, and the taking away of
the Kings life: And therefore we trust that in such a case
none will be so farre deficient in their duty as not to defend
themselves against such injust violence, and in the strength
of the Lord to adhere unto their former principles, with
much boldnes of spirit, and willingnesse of heart; In this
certainly we shall have a good conscience and the Lord shall
be with us.
</p>

<p>
We are not so, to have the one of our eyes upon the Sectaries,
as not to hold the other upon the Malignants, they
being an enemy more numerous, and no lesse subtile and
powerfull nor the other, and at this time more dangerous
unto us, not onely because experience hath proven that
there is a greater aptitude and inclination in these of our
Land, to complie with Malignants then Sectaries in that
they carry on their wicked designes under a pretext of being
for the King; But also because there be many of them in our
own bowels, and for that they doe pretend to be for maintenance
of the Kings Person and Authority, and (which is
the matter of our grife) because the King ownes their principles
and wayes; which if it be not taken heed unto, may
prove a great snare, and dangerous tentation to many as
side with them against the Lords people, and his cause.
The constant tenour of the carriage of these in this land, who
<pb n="455"/><anchor id="Pg455"/>
stand for the Cause of God; are undeniable arguments of
their affection to Monarchy, and to that Royall Family and
Line wich hath sweyed the Scepter of this Kingdom for many
hundreds of yeers past. Albeit his Majestie who lately
reigned, refused to harken to their just desires, yet did they
with much patience and Moderation of mind, supplicate
and solicite his Majesty for satisfaction in these things that
concern Religion and the Covenant, and were still willing,
that upon satisfaction given, he should be admitted to the
exercise of his power; and whatsoever envie and malice objects
to the contrary, were carefull to get assurance concerning
the safety of His Majesties Person, when they brought
their Army out of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>; and when notwithstanding of that
assurance, the prevailing party of Sectaries were acting for
his life, did to the utmost of their power, endeavour by
their Commissioners that there might have been no such proceeding,
And when their desires and endeavours were not
successfull, did protest and bear testimony against the same.
And, as both Kirk and State had testified their tender respect
to his Majesty who now reigns, by their Letters written
to him whilst his Father was yet living, So no sooner did the
Parliament heare of his Fathers death, but they did with
all solemnity proclaim him King of these Kingdoms; And
after they had acquainted his Majesty by Messages with their
proceedings herein, Commissioners were sent both from
State and Kirk instructed with power and Commission to
expresse the affection of this Kingdome to Monarchy, and
his Majesties Person and Goverment, together with their
desires concerning the security of Religion, and the Peace
of those Kingdoms. And albeit the desires of both which
are now published to the world, with his Majesties answers
thereto, are such as are most just and necessary; yet the
Counsels of the malignant party had so great influence upon
his Majesty, that his answers are not only not satisfactory,
but short of that which was many times granted by his Royal
Father, and cannot be acquiesced unto, unlesse we would
abandon the League and Covenant, and betray Religion,
and the cause of God.
</p>

<pb n="456"/><anchor id="Pg456"/>

<p>
We hold it the duty of all who live in this Land, to wrestle
with God in the behalfe of the King, that he may be recovered
out of the snare of evill Counsell, and brought to give
satisfaction to the publick desires of Kirk and State; and in
their places and stations to use all endeavours with himselfe
and others for that effect, and to be willing, upon satisfaction
given, to admit him to the exercise of his power, and cheerfully
to obey him in all things according to the will of God,
and the lawes of the Kingdom, and to do every thing that
tends to the preservation of his Majesties Person, and just
greatnesse and Authority, in the defence and preservation
of the true Religion and Liberties of the Kingdomes.
</p>

<p>
But if his Majesty, or any having, or pretending power
and Commission from him, shall invade this Kingdom,
upon pretext of establishing him in the exercise of his Royal
power, as it will be an high provocation against GOD to be
accessory or assisting thereto, so will it be a necessary duty
to resist and oppose the same, We know that men are so
forgetfull of the oath of God, and ignorant of
the interest of Jesus Christ and the Gospel, and doe so little
tender that which concerns his Kingdom and the Privileges
thereof, and do so much dote upon absolute and Arbitrary
Government for gaining their own ends, and so much maligne
the Instruments of the work of Reformation, that they
would admit his Majesty to the exercise of his Royal power
upon any termes whatsoever, though with never so much prejudice
to Religion, and the Liberties of these Kingdomes,
and would think it quarrell enough to make War upon all
those who for consciences sake cannot condescend thereto.
But We desire all these who fear the Lord, and mind to keep
their Covenant impartially to consider these things which
followes.
</p>

<p>
1. That as Magistrates and their power is ordained of God,
so are they in the exercise thereof, not to walk according to
their owne will, but according to the Law of equity and
righteousnesse, as being the Ministers of GOD for the
safety of his People; Therefore a boundles and illimitted
power is to be acknowledged in no King nor Magistrate;
Neither is Our King to be admitted to the exercise of his
<pb n="457"/><anchor id="Pg457"/>
power as long as he refuses to walk in the Administration
of the same according to this rule, and the established
Laws of the Kingdom, that his Subjects may live under
him a quiet and and peaceable life in all Godlinesse and
honestie.
</p>

<p>
2. There is ane mutuall Obligation and Stipulation betwixt
the King and his People; As both of them are tied to
GOD, so each of them are tied one to another for the performance
of mutuall and reciprocall duties: According to
this, It is Satute and Ordained in the 8. Act of the 1. Parliament
of King <hi rend='italic'>James</hi> the 6. <hi rend='italic'>That all Kings, Princes or
Magistrates whatsoever, halding their place, which hereafter shall happen
in any time to Raign and beare rale over this Realm, at the time
of their Coronation and receipt of their Princely Authority, make
their faithfull promise by Oath in the presence of the Eternall GOD
that during the whole course of their lives, they shall serve the same
Eternall GOD to the utmost of their power, according as he hath
required in his most Holy Word contained in the Old and New Testament
and according to the same Word, shall maintain the true Religion
of</hi> Christ Jesus, <hi rend='italic'>the Preaching of His most Holy Word, and due and
right ministration of His Sacraments now received and Preached
within this Realm, and shall abolish and work against all false religion
contrary to the same, And shall rale the peeple committed to their
charge according to the Will and Command of GOD revealed in his
Word and according to the laudable Laws and Constitutions received
within this Realm, And shall procure to the utmost of their power to
the Kirk of God and the whole Christian People, true and perfect
peace in all time comming. And that Justice and Equity be keeped
to all creatures without exception.</hi> Which Oath was sworn,
first by King <hi rend='italic'>Iames</hi> the 6, and afterwards by King
<hi rend='italic'>Charles</hi> at
his Coronation, and is inferred in our Nationall Covenant,
which was approven by the King who lately Reigned, As
long therefore as his Majesty who now Reignes, refuses to
hearken to the just and necessary desires of State and Kirk,
propounded to his Majesty for the Security of Religion,
and safety of his People, and to engage and oblige himself,
for the performance of his Duty to his People, It is consonant
to Scripture and reason and the Laws of the Kingdom,
that they should refuse to admit him to the exercise
<pb n="458"/><anchor id="Pg458"/>
of his Government, untill he give satisfaction in these
things.
</p>

<p>
3. In the League and Covenant which hath been so solemly
sworne and renewed by this Kingdom, the Dutie of defending
and preserving the Kings Majesties Person and Authority
is joyned with, and subordinat unto the dutie of
preserving and defending the true Religion and Liberties of
the Kingdoms: And therefore his Majestie standing in opposition
to the just and necessary publick desires concerning
Religion and Liberties, it were a manifest Breach of Covenant,
and a preferring of the Kings interest to the interest
of <hi rend='italic'>Jesus Christ</hi>, to bring him to the exercise of his Royal power,
which he, walking in a contrary way, and being compassed
about with Malignant Counsels, cannot but employ
unto the prejudice and ruin of both.
</p>

<p>
4. Was not an Arbitrary Government and unlimited power,
the fountain of most of all the Corruptions both in
Kirk and State? And was it not for restraint of this, and for
their own just defence against Tyranny and injust violence,
which ordinarily is the fruit and effect of such a power, that
the Lords People did joyn in Covenant, and have been at
the expense of so much blood, pains and treasure these yeers
past? And if his Majestie should be admitted to the exercise
of his Government before satisfaction given, were it not
to put in his hand that Arbitrary Power, which we have
upon just and necessary grounds been so long withstanding,
and so to abandon our former Principles, and betrary our
Cause?
</p>

<p>
5. The King being averse from the Work of Reformation
and the instruments thereof, and compassed about with Malignant
and disaffected men, whom he hearkens unto as his
most faithfull Counsellers, and looks upon as his best and
most Loyall Subjects, We leave it to all indifferent men to
judge, whether his Majestie, being admitted to the exercise
of his Power before satisfaction given, would not
by such Counsells endeavour an overturning of the things
which GOD hath wrought amongst us, and labour to
draw publick administrations concerning Religion and the
liberties of the Subject, unto that course and channall in
<pb n="459"/><anchor id="Pg459"/>
which they did run under Prelacie, and before the Work of
Reformation: Which we have the more cause to fear, because
his Royall Father did so often declare, that he conceived
himself bound to employ all the power that GOD
should put in his hands to the utmost for these ends; and
that he adheres as yet to his Fathers Principles, and walkes
in his way, and hath made a Peace with the <hi rend='italic'>Irish</hi> Rebels,
by which is granted unto them the full liberty of Popery.
</p>

<p>
6. It is no strange nor new thing for Kingdoms to preserve
Religion of themselves from ruine, by putting restraint
upon the exercise of the power and Government of those
who have refused to grant those things that were necessary
for the good of Religion, and the Peoples safety; There
have bin many precedents of it in this and other nations of
old, and of late. Upon these and other important considerations,
It shall be the wisdom of every one who dwell in the
Land, to take heed of such a temptation &amp; snare, that they be
not accessory to any such designes or endeavours, as they
would not bring upon themselves, and upon their families,
the guilt of all the detriment that will undoubtedly follow
thereupon to Religion and the Covenant, and of all the
miseries and calamities that it will bring upon his Majesties
Person and Throne, and upon these Kingdoms; Such a
thing would in all appearance be the undermining and shaking&mdash;if
not the overthrowing and destroying of the work
of Reformation: And therefore whosoever attempt the same,
oppose themselves to the Cause of GOD, and will at last
dash against the Rock of the LORDS Power, which
hath broken in pieces many high and lofty ones since the beginning
of this work in these Kingdoms: And it is unto
us a sure Word of Promise, That whosoever shall associate
themselves, or take counsel together, or gird themselves
against GOD and His Work, shall be broken in pieces.
</p>

<p>
It is not onely joyning in Arms with the Malignant partie,
that all these who would keep their integritie hath need
to beware of, but also subtil devices and designes, that are
promoted by fair pretexts and perswasions to draw men to
dispense at least with some part of these necessarie desires,
that are propounded to his Majestie for securing of Religion,
<pb n="460"/><anchor id="Pg460"/>
After many turnings and devises the foundation of the unlawful
Engagement was at last laid by his Majesties Concessions
in the year 1648. Wherein though many things seemed
to be granted, yet that was denyed, without which Religion
and the Union betwixt the Kingdoms could not have
been secured: And it is probable, that such a way may be
assayed again, and prosecuted with very much cunning and
skill to deceive and insnare the simple. It doth therefore
concerne all ranks and conditions of persons to be the more
warie and circumspect, especially in that which concerns
the National Covenant, and the Solemn League and Covenant,
that before his Majestie be admitted to the exercise
of his Royal Power, that by and aftour the Oath of Coronation,
he shall assure and declare by his Solemn Oath under
his hand and seal his allowance of the National Covenant,
and of the Solemn League and Covenant, and obligation
to prosecute the ends thereof in his Station and Calling,
and that he shall for himself and his successours, consent
and agree to Acts of Parliament, injoyning the Solemn
League and Covenant, and fully Establishing Presbyterial
Government, the Directory of Worship, the Confession
of Faith and Catechisme, as they are approven by the General
Assembly of this Kirk and Parliament of this Kingdom,
in all his Majesties Dominions, and that he shall observe
these in his own Practice and Familie, and that he shall never
make opposition to any of these, nor endeavour any
change thereof. Albeit the League and Covenant be despised
by that prevailing party in <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, and the Work of
Uniformity, thorow the retardements and obstructions that
have come in the way, be almost forgotten by these Kingdoms,
yet the obligation of that Covenant is perpetual, and
all the duties contained therein are constantly to be minded,
and prosecute by every one of us and our posterity, according
to their place and stations: And therefore we are no
lesse zealously to endeavour, that his Majestie may Establish,
and swear, and subscribe the same, then if it were
unanimously regarded and stuck unto by all the Kingdom of
<hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, for his Majestie swearing and subscribing the League
and Covenant, will much contribute for the Security of
<pb n="461"/><anchor id="Pg461"/>
Religion, his Majesties happinesse, and the Peace of his
Kingdoms.
</p>

<p>
As it is incumbent to all, who live in this Kirk and Kingdom
to be watchful and circumspect, so it concerns these of
the High and Honourable Court of Parliament &amp; their Committees,
in a speciall way to see to their duty, &amp; to be straight
&amp; resolute in the performance of the same; Their former proceedings
is unto us a sufficient evidence and ground of hope,
that they will not be wanting in any necessary testimony of
dutie and Loyalty that they owe to the King, by using all
just and seasonable endeavoures for obtaining satisfaction of
his Majestie, that so he may be established upon his Thrones;
And we trust, that upon the other hand, the sense of
their obligations to God, and his Oath that is upon them,
will make them constantly to adhere to their former principles
resolutions, and desires concerning Religion and the Covenant,
that real satisfaction may be had thereanent, before
the King be put in the exercise of his power; And that
they will carefully provide for the safety of the Kingdom,
both in regard of the intestine dangers, and in regard of invasion
from without; It is not long since they together with the
rest of the Land, made solemn publick Confession of Compliance
with Malignants, carnal confidence, following
of self interests, and hearkening to the Counsels of flesh and
blood, and did in a special way engage themselves to comply,
and seek themselves and their own things no more,
to abandon the counsels of their own hearts, and not to rely
upon the Arm of flesh, and to purge Judicatories and Armies
from Profane and scandalous persons; And God forbid that
they should so soon forget, or neglect so necessary duties
and fall again unto so great and grievous transgressions. We
trust that they will seek the things of CHRIST, and not
their own things, that they will hearken to His Word, and
not walk in the imaginations of their own hearts, that they
will relie upon the Arm of the LORD, and not upon the
arm of flesh, that they will bewary and circumspect in
discerning the dispositions and affections of those whom
they put in trust, and that, seeing this Kingdom hath so much
smarted, &amp; been so often deceived by complyance with Malignants
<pb n="462"/><anchor id="Pg462"/>
they will carefully avoid this snare, inregard of those
who were upon the former unlawful Engagement &amp; be tender
in bringing in of such; And wee cannot but exhort them
in the Name of the LORD, to take notice of the Oppression
of the People and Commons in the Land, by the lawlesse
exactions of Land-Lords, Collectours and Souldiers. We do
not justifie the murmurings and grudgings of those, who,
preferring the things of the world to the Gospel and things
of <hi rend='italic'>Jesus Christ</hi> repine at necessary burthens, without which
it is not possible that the Land can be secured from invasion
without and insurrection within, or the Cause and People
of GOD be defended from enemies: It is the duty
of every one who hath taken the Covenant, willingly and
with a cheerfull minde to bestow their means and their pains
as they shall be called thereunto, in an orderly way: Yet
should these to whom God hath committed the Government,
take carre that they be not needlessely burthened,
and that none grind their faces by oppression, not only by
making of Lawes against the same, but by searching out of
the cause of the poor, and by executing these Lawes timously
upon these that oppresse them, that they may find
real redresse of their just grievances and complaints, and be
encouraged to bear those burthens which cannot be avoyded.
</p>

<p>
As the Parliament have begun, so we hope they will
continue, to purge out all these from trust, that are not of
known integrity and affection to the cause of God, and of
a blamelesse and Christian conversation, and that they and
the officers of the Army in their respective places, will
seriously mind, and speedily and resolutely goe about the
removing from the Army all malignant scandalous persons,
and also the removing of Sectaries when any shall be found
therein, that they may give real evidence that they did not
deal deceitfully with God, in the day that they engaged
themselves thereto.
</p>

<p>
Albeit we hope and pray that those who beare charge in
our Army, will from the remembrance of the Lords goodnesse
to them, and the honour that he hath put upon them,
endeavour to carry themselves faithfully, and straightly,
<pb n="463"/><anchor id="Pg463"/>
Yet it cannot be unseasonable to warn them to take heed of
tentations, and to beware of snares that they be not drawn
to indifference or neutrality in the cause of God, much lesse
unto connivance at, or compliance with the courses and
designes of malignants or Sectaries, but to stick closely by
the same, and to be zealous against all the enemies and adversaries
thereof: And it concerns souldiers to be content
with their wages, and to doe violence to no man, but as
they are called unto the defence of the cause and people of
God, so to behave themselves in such a blamlesse and Christian
way, that their carriage may be a testimony to his
cause, and a comfort to his people; So shall our Armies
prosper, and the Lord shall goe out with them.
</p>

<p>
But most of all it concerns the Ministers of the Gospel
whom God hath called to give warning to his people to look
to their duty; It is undeniably true, that many of the evils
wherewith this Kirk and Kingdome hath been afflicted in
our age, have come to passe because of the negligence of
some, and corruptions of others of the Ministry; Whilest
some fell asleep, and were carelesse, and others were covetous
and ambitious, the evil man brought in Prelacy, and
the Ceremonies, &amp; had farre promoted the Service-Book,
and the Book of Cannons; and the course of backsliding and
revolting was carried on, untill it pleased God to stirre up
the spirits of these few, who stood in the gap to oppose and
resist the same, and to begin the work of Reformation in
the Land; Since which time; the silence of some Ministers,
and compliance of others, hath had great influence
upon the backsliding of many amongst the people, who upon
the discovery of the evill of their way, complain that
they got not warning, or that if they were warned by some,
others held their Peace, or did justifie them in the course
of their backsliding; We can look upon such Ministers no
otherwise then upon those that are guilty of the blood of the
Lords people, and with whom the Lord will reckon for all
the breach of Covenant, and defection that hath been in the
Land. The Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and
they should seek the law at his mouth, for he is the messenger
of the Lord of Hosts; But such are departed out of the
<pb n="464"/><anchor id="Pg464"/>
way, and hath caused many to stumble at the Law, therefore
hath the Lord made them contemtible and base before
all the people; acccording as they have not kept his wayes,
but have been partiall in his law; because they have lost
their savour, he hath cast out many of them as unsavoury
salt: But such as have been faithfull, as he hath preserved
from the violence and fury of men, so hath he verified his
word in their mouths, both against his enemies, and concerning
his people and his work; And makes them see,
though not all their desires concerning the Gospel, and the
work of God in the land yet very much of the fruit of their
labour, by preserving the doctrine and all the ordinances of
Jesus Christ in their purity, and adding in some measure
thereto the power and life thereof. We doe therefore
charge all the Ministers of the land, before God and the
Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead
at his appearing in his Kingdom, as in every thing to be ensamples
of a good conversation, and to walk without offence,
that the ministry be not blamed; So to take heed
unto the flock over which the Holy Ghost hath made them
overseers, to declare unto them all the Counsell of God,
and to give them timous warning concerning every danger
and duty, and to hold forth unto them the solid grounds of
reall consolation, by which they may be encouraged and
comforted in all their trials and afflictions; that they may
be free of the blood of all men, and have this as a ground of
rejoycing, even the testimony of their consciences,
that in simplicity and godly purenesse, not with fleshly
wisdome, but by the grace of God they have had their conversation
in the world, and have exhorted and comforted
and charged every one committed unto them as a Father
doth his childrren. Especially, Ministers are
to be careful to be much indiscovering the temptations,
and pressing the duties of the times that these who are
under their charge may know what to avoid, and what
to embrace and pursue: If all the Watchmen in the Land
shall give warning, and blow the Trumpet at once, it shall
not be easie for enemies to prey upon the people of God.
Wee know no cause why any whom God hath called to
<pb n="465"/><anchor id="Pg465"/>
preach the Gospel, should be afraid to speak boldly in the
Name of the Lord; since God hath given so manifest a testimony
of his care and protection, in preserving them, these
yeers past, who have striven to be faithfull to him who hath
called them from all the fury and malice of haters of the
work of God and of the Kingdom or of his Sonne Jesus Christ,
who hath promised to be with his servants unto the end of
the world.
</p>

<p>
Albeit the Land be involved in many difficulties, and
compassed about with great and iminent dangers, yet there
is hope and ground of consolation concerning this thing.
The Lord is in the midst of us, and we are called by his
name, our eares hear the joyfull sound of the Gospel, and
and our eyes see our Teachers; We behold the arms of the
Lord stretched out daily in working salvation for his people,
and answering their desires upon their enemies by terrible
things in righteousnesse; Although we be but few in number,
yet the Lord of Hosts is with us, and in the power of
his strenth we shall be able to prevaile. Although our land be
filled with sin, yet we have not been forsaken of the Lord
our God, but he hath alwayes had compassion upon us, and
delivered us in all our distresses; Although some of understanding
fall, it is but to try, and to purge and to make
white even to the end, because it is yet for a time appointed;
Although many cleave to us by flatteries, yet there be a
remnant who keep their integrity, and the Lord shall doe
good to these that be good, but such as turn aside to crooked
wayes, shall be led forth with the workers of iniquity.
</p>

<p>
The Lords people in <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>
and <hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi>, who adhere to
the cause and Covenant, may be perplexed, but shall not
despair; they may be persecuted, but shall not be forsaken;
they may be cast down, but shall not be destroyed: And
although uniformity, and the work of Reformation in these
lands, seem not only to be retarded, but almost pluckt up
by the roots, and the foundation thereof razed; Yet the
seed which the Lord hath sowen there, shall again take
root downward, and bear fruit upward, The zeal of the
Lord of Hosts shall performe this.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n="466"/><anchor id="Pg466"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>30. July 1649. Antemeridiem</hi> Sess. 30.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act concerning Catechising.</hi></head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly taking to their serious Consideration
the great darknesse and Ignorance, wherein a
great part of this Kingdom lyeth, together with the late
Solemn Engagement, to use all means for remedy thereof,
doe ordaine every Minister with assistance of the Elders of
their severall Kirk sessions to take course, that in every house
where there is any who can read, there be at least one Copie
of the Shorter and Larger Catechisme, Confession of Faith
and Directorie for Familie worship. And doe renew the
Act of the Assemblie <hi rend='italic'>August 30. 1639.</hi> for a day of weeklie
Catechising, to be constantly observed in every Kirk, And
that every Minister so Order their Catethetick Questions,
as thereby the People, (who doe not conveen all at one
time but by turns unto that exercise) may at every dyet
have the chief heads of saving knowledge in a short view
presented unto them, And the Assembly considering that
notwithstanding of their former Act, these dyets of weekly
Catechising are much slighted and neglected by many Ministers
throughout this Kingdome, Doe therefore Appoint
and Ordaine every Presbytery, to take triall of all the ministers
within their bounds once at least in the halfe year,
whither they be carefull to keep weekly dyets of Catechising;
And if they shall finde any of their number negligent
herein they shall admonish for the first fault, and if after
such admonition they shall not amend, The Presbyterie
for the second fault shall rebuke them sharply, and if
after such rebuke they doe not yet amend, they shall be
suspended.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n="467"/><anchor id="Pg467"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>4 Aug. 1649. Antemeridiem</hi> Sess. 40.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Commission for publick Affaires.</hi></head>

<p>
The Generall Assemblie Considering how necessary it is
for preservation of Religion in this Kingdom, and
prosecution of the work of uniformity in all his Majesties
dominions, That the Commissions formerly granted to
that effect be renewed: Therefore they doe renew the
power and Commission granted for the Publick affairs of the
Kirk by the Generall Assemblies held at <hi rend='italic'>Saint Andros</hi> 1642.
and at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, 1643, 1644, 1645, 1646, 1647. and
1648, unto the Persons following, viz. Masters <hi rend='italic'>Alex. Rollock,
John Murray, Thomas Lundie, John Freebairne, Geo. Murray,
Harie Livingston, William Macjore, Hew Henderson, Samuel
Austine, Gavin Young, David Laing, William Maxwell, John
Macleland, James Irving, Robert Ferguson, John Scot, Thomas
Wylie, Hew. Eccles, John Bell, John Nevoy, William Gutherie,
John Hammiltoun, Hew Peebles, Alex. Dunlope, Harie Semple,
David Dickson, Patrick Gillespie, James Durham, Robert Baillie,
William Hammiltoun, Francis Aird, James Nasmith, Richard
Inglis, William Summervail, Evan Cameron, Robert Blair,
Samuel Rutherfoord, James Wood, John Macgill Elder, Alex.
Balfoure, William Row, John Moncriefe, Fredrick Carmichaell,
Herie Wilke, William Oliphant, George Pitillo, John Robison, James
Thomsone, William Rate, Da. Campbell, Andro Cant, Io. Menzes,
Andro Abercromby, Robert Sheyn, William Forbes, John
Paterson, Duncan Forbes, Will. Chalmers, John Annand, Will.
Falconer, Murdoch Mackenzie, Robert Jameson, Gilbert Marshell,
Jo. Dallase, Wil. Smyth, Robert Hume, Tho. Suintoun,
James Strateum, Jo. Douglass, James Guthrie, Tho. Donaldson,
Will Jameson, John Livingstoun, John Scot, Andro. Dunkeson,
John Dalzell, Arthur Forbes, James Fleming, James Robison,
Hew Campbel, Robert Douglasse, Mungo Law, George Leslie,
John Adamson, James Hammiltoun, John Smyth, Hew Mackell,
Geo: Hutchison, Patrick Fleming, John Hay, Ephraim Melvill,
Iohn Low, Gilbert Hall, George Bennet, Kenneth Logie, John
Crafurd</hi> Ministers, <hi rend='italic'>Archbald Marquesse of Argyle</hi>,
<pb n="468"/><anchor id="Pg468"/>
E. <hi rend='italic'>of Sutherland, Alex.</hi> E. <hi rend='italic'>of Eglintoun,
John</hi> E. <hi rend='italic'>of Cassills, Wil.</hi> E. <hi rend='italic'>of
Lothian</hi>, the Viscount of <hi rend='italic'>Arbuthnet, Da. L. Elcho</hi>
Lo. <hi rend='italic'>Briehen, Rob.</hi> Lo. <hi rend='italic'>Burly, James Lo.
Couper</hi>, Sir <hi rend='italic'>Archald Johnstoun of Waristoun</hi> Clerk Register,
<hi rend='italic'>Sir Daniel Carmichael</hi> Thesaurer Depute, <hi rend='italic'>Sir
John Hope</hi> of <hi rend='italic'>Craighall, Mr George Winraham</hi> of
<hi rend='italic'>Libbertoun, Mr Alex. Person</hi> of <hi rend='italic'>Southhal, Alex.
Brodie</hi> of that ilk, four of the ordinary Lords of the Session,
<hi rend='italic'>Arthur Ersken of Scotscrage</hi>, Laird of <hi rend='italic'>Wauchtoun,
Sir David Hume</hi> of <hi rend='italic'>Wedderburne, Laird</hi> of
<hi rend='italic'>Edzell</hi>, Laird of <hi rend='italic'>Nidrie, Sir
William Scot</hi> of <hi rend='italic'>Harden</hi>, Laird of
<hi rend='italic'>Greenheid</hi>, Laird of <hi rend='italic'>Freeland</hi>,
Laird of <hi rend='italic'>Cesnock</hi>, Sr. <hi rend='italic'>James Stewart</hi> of
<hi rend='italic'>Kirk field</hi>, the Laird of <hi rend='italic'>Suintoun</hi> younger,
Laird of <hi rend='italic'>Eight</hi>, Sir <hi rend='italic'>James Fraser</hi>, Sir
<hi rend='italic'>Thomas Ker</hi>, Laird of <hi rend='italic'>Fernie</hi>, Sir
<hi rend='italic'>Rob. Adair</hi>, Sheriff of <hi rend='italic'>Tiviotdail</hi>
younger, Tutor of <hi rend='italic'>Pitsligo</hi>, Sir <hi rend='italic'>John
Chiesly</hi>, Laird of <hi rend='italic'>Englistoun</hi>, Laird of
<hi rend='italic'>Leslie</hi> younger, Laird of <hi rend='italic'>Dunbeth</hi>, La.
of <hi rend='italic'>Wetertoun</hi>, Sir <hi rend='italic'>Jo. Smyth</hi>, Mr
<hi rend='italic'>Alex. Colvill</hi> of <hi rend='italic'>Blair, Whitbank</hi>
younger, La. of <hi rend='italic'>Grenock, Galloshiels</hi> younger,
<hi rend='italic'>Buchchantie,
Grachlaw, Cloberhil, Dalserf</hi>, Mr <hi rend='italic'>Robert Burnet</hi>
younger, Mr <hi rend='italic'>Tho. Murray, James Eleis, David Kennedie,
Alex Jaffray, James Sword, George Porterfield, Mr Rob. Barclay,
Hew Kennedey, Will. Glendoning, Thomas Machirnie,
Rob. Lockhart</hi>, Er <hi rend='italic'>James Campbel, John Carsane, John Boswel.</hi>
D. <hi rend='italic'>Alex. Donglasse, Mr Alex. Skeen, William Broun Elders</hi>,
Giving unto them full Power and Commission to do all and
every thing for preservation of the Established Doctrine,
Discipline, Worship and Government in this Kirk, against
all who shall endeavour to introduce any thing contrarie
thereunto; And for prosecuting, advancing, perfecting
and bringing the works of uniformitie in Religion in all his
Majesties dominions to a happy conclusion conform to the
former Commissions granted by preceding Assemblies thereanent.
</p>

<p>
And to that effect appoints them or any nineteen of them
whereof 13. shall be Ministers, to meet in this Citie to morrow
the 7. of this instant, and thereafter upon the second
Wednesday of <hi rend='italic'>Novemb. February</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>May</hi> next,
and upon any other day, and in any other place they shall think fit:
Giving also unto them full power, to send Commissioners
to the Kingdom of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, for prosecuting the Treatie of
<pb n="469"/><anchor id="Pg469"/>
Uniformitie as they shall find conveniencie, and to give
Instructions and Commissions to that effect conform to former
Commissiones granted thereanent: And Likewise in
case delinquents have no constant residence in any one Presbyterie,
or if Presbyteries be negligent or overawed, in these
cases The Assembly gives to the persons before named
power of censuring Compliers &amp; persons disaffected to the
Covenant, according to the Acts of the Assembly, Declaring
alwayes and providing, that Ministers shall not be Deposed,
but in one of the quarterlie meetings of this Commission;
And further authorizes them as formerlie, with
full power to make Supplications, Remonstrances; Declarations
and Warnings, to Indict Fasts and Thanksgivings
as there shal be cause, to protest against all encroachments
upon the Liberties of the Kirk, and to Censure all such as
Interrupt this Commission or any other Church Judicatorie,
or the execution of their Censures, or of any of her sentences
or Acts Issuing from them; And with full power to them
to treat and Determine in the Matters referred unto them by
this Assemblie, as fullie and freelie as if the same were here
fully expressed, and with as ample power as anie Commission
of anie former Generall Assemblies hath had or been in
use of before: Declaring also that all opposers of the Authoritie
of this Commission in matters intrusted to them,
shall beholden as opposers of the Authoritie of the Generall
Assemblie, and this Commission in their whole Proceedings
are Comptable to, and Censurable by the next Generall
Assemblie.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Directorie for Election of Ministers.</hi></head>

<p>
When any Place of the Ministrie in a congregation is
vacant, it is Incumbent to the Presbyterie with all
diligence to send one of their number to Preach to that
Congregation who in his doctrine is to represent to them
the necessitie of providing the place with a qualified pastor,
<pb n="470"/><anchor id="Pg470"/>
and to exhort them to fervent prayer and supplication to the
Lord that he would send them a Pastor according to his own
heart: As also he is to signifie that the Presbyterie out of
their care of that Flock will send unto them Preachers,
whom they may hear, and if they have a desire to hear any
other, they will endeavour to procure them an hearing of
that person or persones upon the sute of the Elders to the
Presbyterie.
</p>

<p>
2. Within some competent time thereafter, the Presbyterie
is again to send one or more of their number to the
said vacant Congregation, on a certain day appoynted before
for that effect, who are to conveen and hear sermon the
foresaid day, which being ended, and intimation being
made by the Minister, that they are to goe about the Election
of a pastor for that Congregation, the Session of the
Congregation shall meet and proceed to the Election, the
action being moderated by him that Preached, And if the
people shall upon the intimation of the Person agreed upon
by the Session acquiesce and consent to the said person,
Then the matter being reported to the Presbyterie by
Commissioners sent from the session, they are to proceed
to the triall of the person thus Elected, And finding him
qualified, to admit him to the Ministry in the said Congregation.
</p>

<p>
3. But if it happen that the Major part of the Congregation
dissent from the person agreed upon by the Session, In that
case the matter shall be brought unto the Presbyterie, who
shall Judge of the same; And if they doe not find their Dissent
to be grounded on Causlesse prejudices, they are to appoynt
a new Election in manner above specified.
</p>

<p>
4. But if a lesser party of the Session or Congregation shew
their dissent from the Election without exceptions relevant
and verified to the Presbyterie, Notwithstanding thereof
the Presbyterie shall go on to the trials and ordination of
the person elected; Yet all possible diligence and tendernesse
must be used to bring all parties to an harmonious
agreement.
</p>

<pb n="471"/><anchor id="Pg471"/>

<p>
5. It is to be understood that no person under the Censure
of the Kirk because of any scandalous offence is to be admitted
to have hand in the election of a Minister.
</p>

<p>
6. Where the Congregation is disaffected and Malignant,
in that case the Presbyterie is to provide them with a
Minister.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>6. August, 1649. Antemeridiem,</hi> Sess. Ult.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>A Brotherly Exhortation from the General
Assembly of the Church of</hi> Scotland, <hi rend='italic'>to their
Brethren in</hi> England.</head>

<p>
The many and great obligations which lie upon us in reference
to our Brethren in <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, who hold fast their
integrity, and adhere to the Solemn League and Covenant,
together with the desire which we have to rectifie our Sympathie
with them in their afflictions, and to preserve so far
as in us lieth that fellowship and correspondence that hath
been entertained betwixt the Church of <hi rend='italic'>Scotland</hi>
and <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>
these years past, do call upon us and constrain us not to be
silent in this day of their trouble and distress.
</p>

<p>
Albeit the Lord (who hath his fire in Zion, and his furnace
in Ierusalem) hath now for a long time past, afflicted
these Kingdoms with many &amp; sharp rods, and that his wrath
seems not yet to be turned away, but his hand stretched out
still; yet in all this, it becomes us who live in these lands
to stop our mouthes, neither can any impute iniquity to the
most High.
</p>

<p>
It is rather a wonder, that any mercy should be continued,
and that <hi rend='italic'>England</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Scotland</hi> are not cut off from being
Nations, seeing the back-slidings and provocations of both
has been so many and so grosse, Although the Solemn League
and Covenant was sworne and subscribed by both, yet
have many in both despised the Oath of GOD, as appears
<pb n="472"/><anchor id="Pg472"/>
by the late unlawfull Engagement against the Kingdom of
<hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, contrived and carried on by a prevailing party of
Malignants in this Land, and by the proceedings of the
Sectaries in <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, in reference to Religion and Government.
</p>

<p>
We shall not insist upon what hath been the condition and
carriage of the Lords People in this Land in reference to the
late unlawfull Engagement: As we desire to magnifie the
power and loveing kindenesse of the Lord, who enabled all
the Judicatures of this Church, and a considerable part of
the Parliament, and the body of the Land, to dissent from,
and bear Testimony against the same, which made the House
of Commons in their Letter directed to the last Generall
Assembly or their Commissioners, to declare, that that
Engagement could not be looked on as a Nationall breach,
So we look upon it as a wonder of his Wisdom and Mercy,
that he hath disposed and directed the same for the furtherance
of his Work in our hand, and purging his House amongst
us. All this cometh forth from the Lord of Hosts,
who is wonderfull in Counsel and Excellent in Working.
Neither was it the least part of the lords goodnesse to us,
in that day of our strait that we were led in a plain path,
and kept from complyance with Sectaries on the one hand,
no less then with Malignants on the other. We have obtained
this mercy to be steadfast to our old principles, in
bearing free and faithfull Testimony against their proceedings,
both in reference to Toleration and Government,
and the taking away of the Kings life.
</p>

<p>
And as the danger and judgement which threatens the
Authors and Abettors of these things, doth affect our Spirits
with horrour, and maketh us desire that it may be given
to them of God to repent: So we should conceive our selves
void of Christian affection and compassion toward those
in <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, who suffer for the truth and Cause of God, if
we were not very sensible of all their present troubles and
calamities. It is no small grief to us, that the Gospel and
Government of <hi rend='italic'>Jesus Christ</hi> are so despised in that Land that
faithfull Preachers are persecuted and cryed down, that
Toleration is established by pretext of Law, and maintained
<pb n="473"/><anchor id="Pg473"/>
Military power, and that the Covenant is abolished and buried
in oblivion. All which proceedings, cannot but be
looked upon as directly contrary to the Oath of God lying
upon us, and therefore cannot eschew his Wrath when he
shall come in Judgement, <hi rend='italic'>to be a swift witnesse against those that
swear falsly by his Name.</hi>
</p>

<p>
These things are the more grievous to us, because (beside
many other wofull evils brought forth by them) they
have interrupted the building of the Lords House in <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>;
the foundation whereof was laid by Oath and Covenant
with the most High God, and followed for some years
with many Declarations and Protestations of Faithfull adhering
thereto, and with great expense of blood and Treasure:
Which things were to all the godly in these Nations a
branch of hope, that the Lord would bring to perfection
the Work of Uniformity (so far advanced in all the parts
thereof) in these three Kingdoms.
</p>

<p>
But the great obstructions and sad interruptions that have
been made therein, by the strange and unexpected practises
of many now in place and power in <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, are to all the
welaffected in both Kingdoms, and in all the Churches abroad,
the mater of their sorrow and humiliation. And if
there be any place left for admonition, we Warn such as
have forgotten the Covenant, and despised the Oath of God,
and turned aside to lies and errour, to consider whence they
are fallen, and to repent. Prosperity and success for a time
are no warrantable evidences of a good Cause, nor sufficient
guards against the wrath of God; It is no good use of
the Lords mercy for such men under pretext of Liberty to
make both themselves and others slaves to corruption, and
to make all men both in Church and State like the fishes of
the Sea, or the creeping things that have no ruler over them.
Are these things according to the Word of God, and the
pattern of the best Reformed Churches? Or is that the endeavour
to bring the three Kingdoms to the nearest uniformity
that may be in Doctrine, Worship, Government, and
Discipline; Or is that the maintaining of the union betwixt
the three Kingdomes, when the straitest bond thereof is utterly
dissolved and quite taken away, and the fundamentall
<pb n="474"/><anchor id="Pg474"/>
Government by King and Parliament wholly overturned;
The just God who is of pure eyes beholds these things, and
shall with no lesse fury and indignation break the horn of
these men, then he hath broken the power, and brought
down the pride of Malignants before them, if repentance
prevent not.
</p>

<p>
Amidst these sors and griefes it is unto us matter of rejoycing,
that there be many in <hi rend='italic'>England</hi> who mourn for all
these abominations, and labour to keep their garments pure
by refusing to comply with that course of backsliding, and
by bearing testimony against the same. And we hope the
expectation of such, shall not be disappointed, but that the
Lord will open to them a doore for carrying on of
his work, and making the lying spirit to passe out of that
land.
</p>

<p>
And albeit many think no otherwise of the Covenant and
work of Reformation, then as a mean to further their own
ends; yet we are confident, that none who holds fast their
integrity, have so learned Christ, but are carefull to make
conscience of the oath of God lying on them; And we are
sure (whatever be the base thoughts and expressions of backsliders
from the Covenant) it wants not many to own it in
those Kingdomes, who (being called thereto) would seale
the same with their blood.
</p>

<p>
Although there were none in the one Kingdome who did
adhere to the Covenant, yet thereby were not the other
Kingdom nor any person in either of them absolved from
the bond thereof, since in it we have not only sworne by the
Lord, but also covenanted with him. It is not the failing
of one or more that can absolve others from their duty or tye
to him; Besides, the duties therein contained, being in
themselves lawfull, and the grounds of our tye thereunto
moral, though others do forget their duty, yet doth not
their defection free us from that obligation which lyes upon
us by the Covenant in our places and stations. And the
Covenant being intended and entred into by these Kingdoms,
as one of the best means of stedfastnesse, for guarding
against declining times; It were strange to say that the
back-sliding of any should absolve others from the tye thereof,
<pb n="475"/><anchor id="Pg475"/>
especially seeing our engagement therein is not only
nationall, but also personall, every one with uplifted
hands swearing by himselfe, as it is evident by the tennor of
the Covenant.
</p>

<p>
From these and other important reasons, it may appear
that all these Kingdomes joyning together to abolish that oath
by law, yet could they not dispense therewith; Much lesse
can any one of them, or any part in either of them doe the
same. The dispensing with oathes hath hitherto been abhorred
as Antichristian, and never practised and avowed
by any, but by that man of sin; therefore those who take
the same upon them, as they joyn with him in his sin, so
must they expect to partake of his plagues.
</p>

<p>
As we shall ever (God willing) be mindfull of our duty to
the faithfull that adhere to the Covenant in <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, having
them alwayes in our hearts before the Lord, so we desire to
be refreshed with their singlesse and boldnesse in the cause of
God, according to their places. This is the time of their
triall, and the houre of tentation among them; blessed shall
they be who shall be found following the Lamb, and shall
not be ashamed of his testimony. We know in such dark houres,
many are drawne away with the multitude, whom the
Lord will again purge and make white; And we doubt not
but many such are in <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, whom the bold clear preaching
of Christ may reclaim; Much therefore lieth upon the
Watch-men all this time, that their Trumpet may give a certain
and distinct sound, warning and exhorting every one, as
those that must give account; And blessed shall those servants
be, who shall be found faithfull in their Lords house, distributing
to his houshold what is meet for this season, and can
say they are free of the blood of all men, having shewen them
the whole Counsell of God, being in nothing terrified of
the threats of their adversaries; And blessed &amp; happy shall that
people be, that walk in the light holden forth by them, and
staye upon the Lord in this dark time, harkning to the voyce
of his servants, &amp; walking in the light of his word &amp; not in
the sparks of their owne kindlings, which will end in sorrow.
How inexcusable will <hi rend='italic'>England</hi> be, having so foulie revolted
against so many faire testimionies, which the Lord Christ hath
<pb n="476"/><anchor id="Pg476"/>
entred as Protestations to preserve his right, in these ends
of the earth long since given unto him for his possession, and
of late confirmed by Solemne Covenant. Christs right to
these Kingdomes is surer then that he should be pleaded out
of it by pretended liberty of Conscience, and his begun possession
is more precious to him, then to be satisfied with a
dishonourable toleration. All that yet we have seen, doth
not weaken our confidence of the Lords glorifying the house
of his glory in these lands, and of his sonnes taking unto
him his great power, and reigning in the beauty and power
of his Ordinances in this Island. His name is wonderfull,
and so also are his workes, we ought not therefore to square
them according to our line, but leave them to
him, who hath the government laid upon his shoulder, all
whose wayes are judgement, &amp; whose ruling these Kingdoms
had never yet reason to decline. It is good for us to be stedfast
in our duty, and therein quietly to wait and hope for the salvation
of God. The word of promise is sure, (and hath an
appointed time) that he that will come shall come and will
not tarry. There is none hath cause to distrust the Lords
word to his people; It hath often to our experience been
tryed in the fire, and hath ever come forth with a more glorious
lustre. Let not therefore these that suffer in <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>
cast away their confidence, they are not the first who have
needed patience after that they had done the Lords will. But
let them strengthen the weak hands, and confirm the feeble
knees, and say to the fearfull in heart, be strong, fear not,
behold your God will come with vengeance, even God
with a recompence, he will come and save you. Now the
just shall live by faith, whereas these that draw back, or
become lukewarm in the Lords work, his soul shall abhorre
them, and he shall spue them out of his mouth, But
we perswade our selves of better things of these our brethren
in <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, and prayeth that the God of Peace who brought
again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepheard
of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant,
may make them perfect in every good work to doe
his will, working in them that which is well pleasing in his
<pb n="477"/><anchor id="Pg477"/>
fight through Jesus Christ, to whom be Glory for ever.
AMEN.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Act for a Collection for entertaining Highland
Boyes at Schooles.</hi></head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly Considering that the contribution
of fourty shillings for entertaining of Highland
boyes at Schools, in respect of the penury and great indigence
of those parts hath not taken the intended effect. Therefore
in respect of the necessity and profitablenesse of so
pious a work The Assembly in lieu of the said fourty shillings
Do Appoint and Ordain that there be an extraordinary
Collection at the Kirk doors for that use one Sabbath in the
year: And to that effect, that a certain Sabbath yearly be
appointed and designed whereupon that collection shall be
gathered, intimation being made by the Minister the Sabbath
before to prepare for such a collection, and the necessity and
usefulnesse thereof being laid out to the people for that end.
And if the collection in any little private Congregation shall
be lesse then fourty shillings, The Session shall make up what
wants of fourty shillings; And where the collection is more,
it is hereby specially inhibited and discharged that any part
thereof be retained or interverted to any other use whatsomever;
and these Collections shall be sent to the persons formerly
appointed to receive the fourty shillings, that they
may see the right distribution and employment thereof; Recommending
the Presbyteries see this punctually performed.
And accompt thereof shall be craved at Synods
and Generall Assemblies. It is alwayes to be remembred
that the Congregations exeemed from the fourty shillings
are also exeemed from this Collection.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="478"/><anchor id="Pg478"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Commission for a conference of Ministers,
Lawyers and Physitians, Concerning the tryal
and punishment of Witch-craft, Charming
and Consulting.</hi></head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly Taking to their serious consideration
the growth of the sins of Witchcraft, Charming and
Consulting, notwithstanding the frequent Recommendations
for restraining thereof; And remembring that the Generall
Assembly 1647. did propose a good way for the tryal
and punishment of these sinnes, by appointing conferences
with some Ministers, Lawyers and Physitians in that matter
which hath never yet taken effect; Therefore the Assembly
doth appoint Masters, <hi rend='italic'>Robert Dowglas, Robert Blair,
Mungo Law, James Hammilton, John Smith, Robert Traill,
George Leslie, John Hamilton, Iohn Duncan, Samuel Rutherfoord,
James Wood, Iohn Leviston, Iames Guthrie, Andro
Cant, David Calderwood, Iohn Moncreiff, Frederick Carmichael,
Iames Durhame, Patrick Gillespie, Robert Ker, Ephraim
Melvil</hi>, Ministers, To consider seriously of that matter,
and to consult and advise therein amongst themselves,
As also with Sir <hi rend='italic'>Archibald Iohnston</hi> of
<hi rend='italic'>Wariston</hi>,
Clerk Register, Mr <hi rend='italic'>Thomas Nicolson</hi> his Majesties Advocate,
Mr <hi rend='italic'>Alexander Peirson</hi>, one of the ordinary Lords
of Session, Sir <hi rend='italic'>Lewes Stewart</hi>, Mr <hi rend='italic'>Alexander
Colvil</hi>, and Mr <hi rend='italic'>Iames Robertson</hi> Iustice Deputes, Masters
<hi rend='italic'>Rodger Mowit, John Gilmoir</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>Iohn
Nisbet</hi>, Laweers; and with Doctors <hi rend='italic'>Sibbald, Cunninghame</hi>, and
<hi rend='italic'>Purves</hi>, Physitians severally
or together as occasion shall offer; And the Assembly
earnestly requests &amp; confidently expects from their learned
and Iudicious Lawyres and Physitians beforenamed, their
best endeavours and concurrence with their brethren of the
Ministrie for advise and counsell herein, and for conference
in the said matter; And Ordaine the said brethren to make
report of the result of their consultations and conferences
from time to time as they make any considerable progresse to
the Commission for publick affaires, And the said Commission
shall make report to the next Generall Assembly.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="479"/><anchor id="Pg479"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Recommendation for maintenance for Schoolmasters
and Precenters.</hi></head>

<p>
The Generall Assembly do humbly Recommend to the
Parliament or Committee for plantation of Churches,
that whatever either in Paroches of Burghs or Landwart,
was formerly given to the maintenance of these who were readers
precentors in Congregations, and teachers of Schooles
before the establishing of the Directory for publick Worship,
may not be in whole or in part alienat or taken away, but
reserved for the maintenance of sufficient schoolmasters
and precentors who are to be approven by the Presbyterie;
And Presbyteries are hereby required to see that none of that
maintenance given to the foresaid uses or in use to be payed
thereunto before the establishing of the Directory of Worship,
to be drawn away from the Church.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Acts concerning Persons to be admitted
Bursars.</hi></head>

<p>
The Assembly doe hereby Ordaine That none be sent to
Universities from Presbyteries, nor be admitted as
Bursers of divinitie, but pious youths, and such as are
known to be of Good expectation and approven abilities.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Reference to the Commission for publick affaires
for re-examining the Paraphrase, of the Psalmes
and the emitting the same for publicke use.</hi></head>

<p>
The General Assembly having taken some view of the
new Paraphrase of the Psalmes in meeter with the corrections
and animadversions thereupon sent from several
Persons and Presbyteries, and finding that they cannot overtake
the review and examination of the whole in this
<pb n="480"/><anchor id="Pg480"/>
Assembly; Therefore now after so much time and so great
paines about the correcting, and examining thereof from
time to time some yeares bygone, that the worke may come
now to some conclusion, They do ordain the Brethren appointed
for perusing the same during the meeting of this Assembly,
<hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi> Masters <hi rend='italic'>James Hammilton, Iohn Smith, Hew
Mackall, Robert Traill, George Hutcheson</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>Robert Lawrie</hi>,
after the dissolving of this Assembly to goe on in that worke
carefully, And to report their travels to the Commission of
the Generall Assembly for publick affaires at ther meeting at
<hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi> in <hi rend='italic'>November</hi>; And the said
Commission after perusall and re-examination thereof, is hereby authorised
with full power to conclude and establish the Paraphrase,
and to publish and emit the same for publick use.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>Letter to the Kings Majestie.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Most gracious Soveraigne,</hi>
</p>

<p>
Wee your Majesties most humble and Loyall Subjects,
the Commissioners from all the Presbyteries in this
your Majesties ancient Kingdome, and members of this
present Nationall Assembly, Having expected to finde at
our meeting, a gracious and Satisfactory returne to those
humble representations made to your Majestie at the <hi rend='italic'>Hague</hi>,
by the Commissioners of this Kirk, cannot but expresse
our great sorrow and griefe, that your Majesties
goodnes has been so far abused, As that not only the just
and necessary desires presented by them to your Majestie,
which so much concerne the glory of God, your owne
honour and happinesse, the peace and safety of your Kingdomes,
are utterly frustrated, as wee perceive by the paper
delivered in answer to them; but also this Assembly
hath not received so much as any signification by letter
of your Majesties minde: Which princely condescension
had not wont to be wanting in your Royall Father, to former
Generall Assemblyes, even in times of greatest distance.
</p>

<pb n="481"/><anchor id="Pg481"/>

<p>
Our witnesse is in heaven, and record on high, that wee
are not conscious to our Selves of any undutifull thought or
disloyall affection, that might have procured this at your
Majesties hands; And that, as wee doe from our hearts
abominate and detest that horrid fact of the Sectaryes against
the life of your Royall Father our late Soveraigne, So it is
the unfained and earnest desire of our soules, that the Ancient
Monarchicall government of these Kingdoms, may
be established and flourish in your Majesties person all the
dayes of your life, and be continued in your royall Family
which by divine providence hath without interruption
raigned over us and our predecessors for so many Generations
since the time that we were a Kingdom, And that
there is nothing under the glory of God, and cause of our
Lord Jesus Christ, for which wee doe more heartily solicit
the throne of grace, Or would more readily expose
unto hazard all that is deare to us in the world, then for
this. And now though this very great discouragement
might incline us to hold our peace at this time, Yet the
tendernesse and uprightnesse of our affection and Love to
your Majesties happinesse (which many waters cannot
quench) together with the Conscience of our duty which
Our Lord and Master has laid upon us, in this our place
and station, constraineth us, yea, and your Majesties owne
goodnesse and gracious disposition, whereof the late Commissioners
have given us so Large a testimony, Doth much
encourage us, to renew our addresses to your Majestie in
this humble faithfull representation, both of the great and
growing dangers to your Royall person and Throne, and
of these duties, which the Lord of Lords and King
of Kings, call for from you, as you would look to finde
favour in his eyes, and to be delivered out of your deepe
distresses.
</p>

<p>
Our hearts are filled with fears and troubles, in your
Majesties behalf, when we look upon the sad calamities
which have been already produced by such wayes and courses,
as we perceive your Majestie is entred, and in danger
to be further led away into, by the prevalency of evill Councell
<pb n="482"/><anchor id="Pg482"/>
upon your tender age: Particalarly, Your refusing to
give satisfaction to the just and necessary desires of the people
of God, for advancing the work of Reformation of
Religion, and establishing and securing the same in your
Majesties Dominions, which is nothing else, but to oppose
the Kingdome of the Sonne of God, by whom Kings
doe raigne, and to refuse that he should raigne over you and
your Kingdomes in his pure Ordinances of Church government
and Worship; Your cleaving unto these men as your
trustiest Counsellors, who, as they never had the glory of
God, nor good of his people before their eyes, so now in all
their wayes and Counsels, are seeking nothing but their owne
interests, to the hazard of the utter subversion of your
Throne, the ruine of your Royall Family, and the desolation
of your Kingdomes; Your owning the practises,
and intertaining the Person of that flagicious man, and most
justly excommunicate Rebell, <hi rend='italic'>James Graham</hi>, who has exercised
such horrid cruelty upon your best Subjects in this
Kingdom, which cannot but bring upon your Throne, the
guiltinesse of all the innocent blood shed by him and his
Complices; and above all, that, which we cannot think
upon without trembling of heart and horrour of spirit,
Your setling of late such a Peace with the Irish Papists the
Murderers of so many thousands of your Protestant Subjects,
whereby not only they are owned as your good Loyall
Subjects, but also there is granted unto them (contrary
to the Standing Lawes of your Royall Progenitors, contrary
to the commandment of the most high God, and to
the high contempt and dishonor of his Majestie, and evident
danger of the Protestant Religion) a full liberty of their
abominable Idolatry; which cannot be otherwise judged,
but a giving of your Royal power and strength unto the
beast, and an accession to all that blood of your good Subjects,
wherewith those Sonnes of Babell have made that
Land to swim.
</p>

<p>
We do in all humility beseech your Majestie to consider &amp;
lay to heart what the mouth of the Lord of Hosts hath spoken
of all the accompts of People, Nations, Kings, and Rulers against
<pb n="483"/><anchor id="Pg483"/>
the Kingdom of his Son, that they imagine a vaine thing
and that he that sitteth in heaven will have them in dirision
and vex them in his sore displeasure. Consider, how he hath
blasted and turned upside downe these yeares by past, all the
devices and plots of those men that now beare the Swey in
your Majesties Counsels: Consider, how the anger of God has
been kindled, even against his dearest Saints, when they have
joyned themselves to such men as he hateth and has cursed:
Consider, how severely hee hath threatned and punished
such Kings as have associate with Idolaters, and leaned unto
their helps. Surely, great is the wrath of God, whereof you
are in danger; And yet the Lord in the riches of his goodnesse,
forbearance and long suffering, is waiting to be gracious
to your Majestie; To day if ye will hear his voice, harden
not your heart, but humble your self under the mighty
hand of God, lamenting after him as, for the iniquities of
your Fathers house, especially the opposition against the reformation
of Religion and Cause of God, the permitting
and practising Antichristian Idolatry in the Royall Family
it self, and the shedding of so much blood of the people of
God, so also, for your owne entering to walke in the like
courses in the beginning of your raign. It is high time to
fall downe before the Throne of grace, seeking to get your
peace made with God through Jesus Christ whose blood is
able to wash away all your sins, To walk no longer in the
Councel of the ungodly, nor cleave to such as seeke their
own things and not the things of Jesus Christ, nor the welfare
of your Subjects and Government, but to set your eyes
upon the faithfull in your dominions, that such may dwell
with you, &amp; be the men of your Councells, To serve the Lord
in feare, and kisse the Sonne of God, by a sincere and cordiall
contributing your Royall allowance and authority, for
establishing in all your dominions the reformation of Religion,
in Doctrine, Worship, and Government as it is now agreed
upon according to the cleare &amp; evident warrant of the
word of God, by the Assembly of Divines at <hi rend='italic'>Westminster</hi>, and
the Generall Assemblies of this Church; And also, laying
aside that service book, which is so stuffed with Romish
corruptions, And conforming your owne practise and the
<pb n="484"/><anchor id="Pg484"/>
worship of God in your Royall Family, to that Gospell
simplicity and purity which is holden forth from the word
of God, in the Directory of worship, and not only to grant
your Royall approbation to the Covenant of these three
Kingdomes (without which, your people can never have
from you sufficient security, either for Religion, or their
just liberties) but also your selfe to joyne with your people
therein as the greatest security under Heaven for your person
and just greatness, and to cause all of them stand to it by
your Royall Command, according to the practise of that
gracious King <hi rend='italic'>Josiah</hi>, to whom, wee wish your Majestie
in these your younger yeares, and this beginning of your
raigne, to look as to an ensample and Kingly portract approven
of God. These things if your Majestie do; As wee
are well assured, that the hearts of all your good Subjects in
these Kingdomes will be enlarged with all cheerfulnesse to
imbrace your person, and submit unto your Royall Government,
so wee darre promise in the Name of our Lord, that
you shall finde favour with God, peace and joy unspeakable
and full of glory to your Soule, and deliverance out of your
sad afflictions and deep distresses in due time: But if your
Majestie shall go on in refusing to hearken to wholesome
Councels; We must for the discharge of our Conscience
tell your Majestie in the humility and griefe of our hearts,
that the Lords anger is not turned away, but his hand
stretched out still against you and your Family. But we hope
and shall with all earnestnesse and constancy pray for better
things from, and to your Majestie: And whatsoever misconstruction
(by the malice of those that desire not a right
understanding and cordiall conjunction between your Majestie
and this Kirk and Kingdome) may be put upon our
declaration; Yet wee have the Lord to be our witnesse,
that our purpose and intention therein is no other, but to
warne and keepe the people of God committed to our care,
that they runne not to any course which would bring upon
themselves the guilt of highest perjury and breach of Covenant
with God, and could not but prove most dangerous
to your Majestie and your Government, and involve you in
<pb n="485"/><anchor id="Pg485"/>
shedding the blood of those who are most desirous to preserve
your Majesties Person, and just right in all your dominions.
And now wee doe with all earnestnes beseech
your Majestie, that you will follow the courses of truth and
peace; And that when there is a doore opened for your
Majestie to enter to your Royall Government over us, in
peace, with the favour of God, and cordiall Love and
imbracings of all your good Subjects, You will not suffer
your selfe to be so farre abused and misled by the Councels
of men, who delight in war, as to take away of violence
and blood, which cannot but provoke the most high against
your Majestie, and alienat from you the hearts of your
best Subjects, who desire nothing more, than that your
Majestie may have a long and happy raign over them, And
that they may live under you, a peaceable and quiet life, in
all Godlinesse and honesty.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh 6 August,
1649.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Your Majesties most Loyal Subjects and
humble servants the Ministers and
Elders conveened in this Nationall
Assembly of the Kirk of</hi> Scotland.
</p>

</div>

<div>

<p>
The Generall Assembly not having now time to consider
the Reference of preceeding Assemblies, and the
most part of Presbyteries not having sent their opinions
in writ; Thefore do yet againe recommend to Presbyteries
and Provinciall Assemblies to consider all matters
referred by this or by any former Assemblies, And to send
their opinions therein in writ to the next Generall Assembly.
</p>

<p>
The meeting of the next Generall Assembly is hereby appointed
to be at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, the second wednesday of
<hi rend='italic'>July</hi>, 1650.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>A. Ker</hi>
</p>

<p>
FINIS
</p>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<pb n="499"/><anchor id="Pg499"/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>The Principal Acts of the General Assembly of the Church of
<hi rend='italic'>Scotland</hi> holden at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>
the 16th day of <hi rend='italic'>October</hi> 1690.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Edinburgh <hi rend='italic'>16 of October 1690. Post Meridiem.</hi> Sess.
1.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>I. <hi rend='italic'>The Meeting of the</hi> General Assembly, <hi rend='italic'>and
the Recording of Their Majesties</hi> Commission, <hi rend='italic'>to</hi> John
<hi rend='italic'>Lord</hi> Carmichael, <hi rend='italic'>for Representing Their
Majesties therein.</hi></head>

<p>
This day, being a day of Solemn Fasting
and Humiliation, the General
Assembly of the Ministers and Elders
of this Church; did after Sermons
(in the Forenoon by Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>Gabriel Cunningham</hi> Moderator of the
last General Meeting, and in the Afternoon by Mr.
<pb n="500"/><anchor id="Pg500"/>
<hi rend='italic'>Patrick Sympson</hi> Moderator of the preceding General
Meeting) Conveen in the Assembly-House at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>,
according to the Indiction of an Act of the current
Parliament, dated the 7 day of <hi rend='italic'>June</hi> last, and Directions
given by the late General Meeting of the Ministers
and Elders of this Church: And after Prayer,
there was produced to them, by an Noble Lord <hi rend='italic'>John</hi>
Lord <hi rend='italic'>Carmichael</hi>, Their Majesties Commission, for
his being Their Majesties High Commissioner and
Representative to this General Assembly, Dated at
<hi rend='italic'>Kensingtoun</hi> the 10 day of <hi rend='italic'>October</hi> 1690.
Which was with all due Respect publickly read: And Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Gabriel
Cuningham</hi>, Moderator for the time, did in the Assemblies
Name, Represent to his Grace, how Great a
Mercy it was, to this Church and Kingdom, that Their
Majesties had Countenanced this Assembly, with Their
Authority, and Honoured it with a Representative of
Their Royal Persons: And the Assemblies great Satisfaction,
with Their Majesties choice of a person so well
Qualified, and so Acceptable to this Assembly, to Represent
Their Majesties therein. To whom His Grace
was pleased to give this return, That it was his firm
Resolution, in the Capacity, wherein Their Majesties
had now put him, to lay out himself for their Majesties
Service, and the good of the Church. The Assembly
appointed the said Commission to be Recorded
in Their Books, <hi rend='italic'>Ad futuram res Memoriam</hi>: The Tenour
whereof follows.
</p>

<pb n="501"/><anchor id="Pg501"/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>GULIELMUS &amp; MARIA</hi>, Dei Gratia, Magnæ
<hi rend='italic'>Britannia, Francia &amp; Hibernia</hi>, Rex &amp; Regina,
Fideique Defensores, Omnibus probis Hominibus, ad
quos præsentes Literæ; Nostræ pervenerint, <hi rend='italic'>Salutem</hi>.
Quandoquidem per actum, in secundâ Sessione Currentis
hujus nostri Parliamenti, Expeditum, De stabiliendo
Ecclesiæ Regimine, in antiquiori hoc nostro Scotiæ
Regno; Primum Ecclesiæíllius Generalem Conventum, <hi rend='italic'>Edinburghi</hi>,
Tertio die Jovis, Mensis <hi rend='italic'>Octobris</hi> Instantis,
teneri Ordinavimus: Nosautem (Rebus magni
Momenti alio vocantíbus) In dicto Conventu interesse
nequimus: Abunde vero Cupidi, ut Idem Generalis
Conventus, ad Religionem veram Reformatam
melius firmandam, Pietatem &amp; Sanctitatem Propagandam,
Pacem itaque &amp; Unitatem, in dictâ Ecclesiâ, &amp;
hoc nostro antiquiore Regno acquirendam; methodo
debitâ &amp; Regulari, Observetur: Cumque Testimoniis
perplurimis &amp; probatis, nobis abunde satisfactum
sit, de Præclaris animi dotibus, &amp; fide eximiâ, fidelisslimi
&amp; dilectissimi nostri Consiliarii. <hi rend='italic'>Joannis</hi> Domini
<hi rend='italic'>Carmichael</hi>, quibus ad summæ fiduciæ Munus infra expressum,
debite &amp; exacte obeundum &amp; excercendum,
usque quaque est adaptatus: Noverítis igítur nos Nominasse
&amp; Constituisse, sicuti per hasce nostras Patentes
Literas, Nominamus &amp; Constituimus Eundem <hi rend='italic'>Joannem</hi>
Dominum <hi rend='italic'>Carmichael</hi>, Supremum nostrum Commissionarium,
quoad effectum intra expressum: Damus
pariter &amp; concedimus illi, sacram Nostram Personam
<pb n="502"/><anchor id="Pg502"/>
&amp; Authoritatem Regiam Repræsentandi, ac pro
nobis præsentiam faciendi, locumque nostrum in subsequenti
Generali Conventu, Tanquam Commissionario
nostro, in hunc effectum specialiter Constitute,
tenendi: Omniaque alia ad Imperium &amp; Munus Commissionarii,
pro Generali Ecclesiæ conventu peragendi,
tam plene, adeoque libere, in quovis Respectu,
quam Quilibet alius ejusdem Muneris &amp; Characteris,
fecerat, seu quovis tempore retroacto facere potuerat,
atque adeo sicuti Nosmet ipsi personaliter præsentes
Possemus. Plenissimam &amp; amplissimam Nostram
Potestatem &amp; Commissionem. Quæquidem omnia &amp;
singula, a dicto <hi rend='italic'>Joanne</hi>
Domino <hi rend='italic'>Carmichael</hi>, In hac
nostra Commissione prolequendâ, legitime facienda,
Nos firmiter approbamus, Rata habemus, &amp; habituri
sùmus. Omnibus &amp; singulis insuper antedicti Conventus,
&amp; Ecclesiæ Pastoribus &amp; Presbyteris, ac Cæterii
quibuscumque hujus Nostri Regni Subditis, cujuscunque
ordinis seu conditionis, ut eundem <hi rend='italic'>Joannem</hi>
Dominum <hi rend='italic'>Carmichael</hi>, tanquam Supremum Nostrum
Commissionarium, quoad effectum &amp; modum supra
mentionatum, agnoscant, Colant, &amp; dicto ipsius audientes
se præbeant, stricte Mandamus &amp; Imperamus.
Et denique hanc Nostram Commissionem, a die quo
Magnum hujus Regni Nostri Sigillum, Presentibus est
appensum, ac durante Primâ dicti Generalis Conventus
Sessione, aut usque donec hæc Nostra Commissio
per nos Revocetur, Continuare Declaravimus, ac per
Præsentes Declaramus. In cujus rei Testimonium, Præsentibus
Magnum Sigillum Nostrum appendi Mandavimus,
Apud aulam Nostram de <hi rend='italic'>Kensingtoun</hi>, decimo
<pb n="503"/><anchor id="Pg503"/>
die mensis <hi rend='italic'>Octobris</hi>, Anno Domini 1690. Regnique
nostri, Anno secundo.
</p>

<p>
Per signaturam manu S.D.N. Regis supra Signatam.
</p>

<p>
(locus figilli appensi)
</p>

<p>
IN DORSO:
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Sealed at</hi> Edinburgh <hi rend='italic'>the
16th of</hi> October 1690.
<hi rend='italic'>Alex. Inglis.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Written to the Great Seal, and
Registr at the 16 day of</hi> October
1690. Dun. Ronald <hi rend='italic'>Dpt.</hi>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Edinburgh 17 October 1690. <hi rend='italic'>Ante Meridiem</hi> Sess. 2.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>II. <hi rend='italic'>His</hi> MAJESTIES <hi rend='italic'>Gracious Letter to the
Assembly.</hi></head>

<p>
This Session, His Majesties Gracious Letter Direct
to this General Assembly, was publickly
Read and Heard with great Respect; and appointed
to be Recorded in the Books of the Assembly, The
Tenour whereof follows.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>William R.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Reverend, Trusty and Well Beloved,</hi>
</p>

<p>
Our Concern for the Good of Our Ancient Kingdom,
hath been such, That We have left nothing
undone, that might Contribute to the making of it
Happy: And therefore having been informed, that
Differences as to the Government of the Church have
caused greatest Confusions in that Nation; We did
<pb n="504"/><anchor id="Pg504"/>
willingly concurre with Our Parliament, in In-acting
such a Frame of it, as was judged to be most agreeable
to the Inclinations of Our Good Subjects: To which
as We have had a particular Regard, in Countenanceing
this Assembly, With Our Authority, and a Representative
of Our Royall Person; So We expect, that
Your Managment shall be such, as We shall have no
reason, to Repent of what we have done. A Calm and
Peaceable Procedure, will be no less pleasing to Us,
than it becometh You. We never could be of the
Mind, that Violence was suited to the advancing of
True Religion; Nor do We intend, that Our Authority
shall ever be a Tool, to the irregular Passions of
any Party. Moderation is what Religion enjoynes,
Neighbouring Churches expect from You, and We
Recommend to You. And We assure You of Our constant
Favour and Protection, in Your following of
these Methods, which shall be for the real advantage
of True Piety, and the Peace of Our Kingdoms. Given
under our Royal Hand, At our Court at <hi rend='italic'>Kensingtoun</hi>,
the 10 day of <hi rend='italic'>October</hi> 1690.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>By His Majesties Command,</hi>
</p>

<p>
MELVIL.
</p>

<p>
Direct,
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>For the Reverend, Trusty and Wel-Beloved,
Ministers and Elders,
met in the General Assembly of the
Church of</hi> Scotland. <hi rend='italic'>At</hi> Edinburgh.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n="505"/><anchor id="Pg505"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Edinburgh <hi rend='italic'>18th.</hi> October 1690.
<hi rend='italic'>Post Meridiem</hi> Sess. 4.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>III. <hi rend='italic'>The Assemblies Answer to His Majesties Gracious
Letter.</hi></head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>May it please your Majesty,</hi>
</p>

<p>
Your Gracious Letter, Direct to the Ministers and
Elders met here, in the General Assembly of the
Church of <hi rend='italic'>Scotland</hi> was Read and Heard among Us,
with all Joy and Thankfulness, that the Rising and
Shining again of the Royal Favour, upon this long
Afflicted and distressed Church, could possibly Inspire:
For as Your Majesties Concern for the Good of this
Your Ancient Kingdom, hath indeed been such, as
nothing can impair the Happy State whereunto You
have Restored it, save the want of the due sense and
understanding of so great a Mercy; So We doe most
heartily acknowledge, that through Your Majesties
Care and Kindness, the Church of Christ therein, doth
equally partake of the same Blessing. It was the sad Confusions,
that differences as to the Government of the
Church, had caused in this Nation, that according to
Your Majesties first Declaration, for our Relief, moved
our Gracious God, to Raise up and Prosper You, to
Be our Glorious Deliverer, for Effectuating the Reestablishment
that we now enjoy: So that we are perswaded,
that it is not more Agreeable, to the Inclinations
and Conscientious Perswasions of all within this
Kingdom, who are best Affected to Your Majesties
Person and Government, than it is acceptable to God,
<pb n="506"/><anchor id="Pg506"/>
and will be Your Majesties perpetual Peace and Satisfaction.
Nor are we less Sensible of the particular Regard,
Your Majestie professeth towards us, on this occasion,
in Countenancing this Assembly, with Your
Authority, and a Representative of Your Royal Person;
for which we most humbly acknowledge Your
Gracious Favour; especially that it hath pleased Your
Majesty, to fix Your Choice, upon a Person so well
Qualified, and so acceptable to Us. And now, <hi rend='italic'>Great
Sir</hi>, after so many and so great Mercies and Favours,
Received from God and Your Majesty; We Hope we
may with Confidence assure You, that our Managment
shall be such, as Your Majesty hath so just Reason
to expect, and shall never give you cause to Repent
of what You have done for Us. The God of Love, the
Prince of Peace, with all the Providences that have
gone over Us, and Circumstances that We are under,
as well as Your Majesties most obliging Pleasure, Require
of Us a Calme and Peaceable Procedure, And if
after the Violence for Conscience sake, that We have
Suffered, and so much Detested, and these Grievious
Abuses of Authority, in the late Reigns, Whereby
through some Mens Irregular Passions, We have so
sadly Smarted; We our selves, should Lapse into the
same Errours, We should certainly prove the most
Unjust towards God, Foolish towards our Selves, and
Ungrate towards Your Majesty, of all Men on earth.
Great Revolutions of this nature, must be attended,
with Occasions of Complaint: And even the worst of
Men, are Ready to cry out of Wrong, for their justest
Deservings: But as Your Majesty Knows these things
<pb n="507"/><anchor id="Pg507"/>
too well, to give us the least Apprehension of any impressions
evil Report can make; So We assure Your
Majesty, as in the Presence of God, and in expectation
of his dreadfull Appearance, that We shall Study
that Moderation, which Your Majesty Recommends,
as being convinced, that it is the Duty that Religion
enjoyns, and Neighbouring Churches doe most justly
expect from Us: Desiring in all things, to Approve
our selves unto God, as the true Disciples of Jesus
Christ, who, though most Zealous, against all Corruptions
in his Church, was most Gentle towards the
Persons of Men: And to maintain as much as in us lyes,
Peace and Concord with all the Reformed Churches:
As likewise to comply in all obsequious Duty, with all
that Your Majesty enjoynes, for the Real Advantage
of true Piety, and the Peace or all Your Kingdoms.
Heartily wishing, that God, who hath Graciously
brought back Your Majesties Person, in Safety, from
Your Late, no less Generous, than Dangerous Expedition,
for his Cause and Truth, with joyfull Success;
May still preserve Your Majesty, and Our most Gracious
Queen; Granting You long Life, Health, and
Prosperity, And may Establish Your Throne, and
Bless Your Government, to the Glory of His Great
Name, the Good of all his Churches, and the welfare
of all Your People. Which shall ever be the earnest
Prayer of,
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>May it please Your Majesty,<lb/>
Your Majesties most Faithful,<lb/>
most Obedient and most Humble Subjects.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Signed in our Presence, in our Name,<lb/>
and at our Appointment, <hi rend='italic'>By<lb/>
HU. KENNEDIE</hi> Moderator.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="508"/><anchor id="Pg508"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>IV. <hi rend='italic'>Appointment of a Diet, to be kept by the Assembly for
Prayer.</hi></head>

<p>
The General Assembly Appoints <hi rend='italic'>Monday</hi> next, betwixt
Eight and Twelve a Clock in the Forenoon,
to be set a part for Prayer, by the Members of
this Assembly: And Recommends to all the Members,
to meet in the Assembly-House for that end, at Eight a
Clock in the Morning.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Edinburgh <hi rend='italic'>25th.</hi> October 1690. <hi rend='italic'>Ante
Meridiem.</hi> Sess. 9.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>V. <hi rend='italic'>The proceedings of the Assembly, anent Mr.</hi> Thomas Lining
<hi rend='italic'>and Others.</hi></head>

<p>
The General Assembly, having received a Report,
from the Committee of Overtures, anent two
Papers given in to the said Committee, and Subscribed
by Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Thomas Lining</hi>, Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>Alexander Shields</hi> and
Mr. <hi rend='italic'>William Boyd</hi>, who had followed some Courses
contrary to the Order of this Church; whereby, <q>The
said Committee out of their ardent Desire of Union
in the Church, Recommend to the Assembly, the
Reading of the Shorter of these two Papers: In
which the fore-named Persons Oblige themselves
after the exhibiting of the larger Paper (which they
<pb n="509"/><anchor id="Pg509"/>
offer, as they profess, for the Exoneration of their
Consciences) and laying it down at the Assemblies
feet, to be Disposed upon as the Assembly should
think fit: That they shall in all required Submission,
subject Themselves, their Lives and Doctrine, to
the Cognizance of the Respective Judicatories of
this Church, and equally to Oppose Schism and Defection,
in any Capacity, that they should be capable
of. But the said Committee, Judgeth, the Reading
of the larger of the saids two Papers, in full Assembly,
to be Inconvenient: In regard, That
though there be several good Things in it, yet the
same doth also contain, several Peremptory and gross
Mistakes, Unseasonable and Impracticable Proposals,
and Uncharitable and Injurious Reflections, tending
rather to kindle Contentions, than to compose
Divisions: Nevertheless, the said Committee, gives it
as their Opinion, That the foresaid Offer of the above
named Persons their Subjection and Obedience, to
the Authority of this Church, in her Respective Judicatories,
contained in the said Shorter Paper;
should be Entertained and Accepted of, by the Assembly,
and they Received into Communion with
this Church, according to their several Capacities.</q>
</p>

<p>
Likeas the above named persons, having Compeared,
in presence of the Assembly, and Judicially Owned
and Adhered unto their said Shorter Paper: And the
Assembly having heard the above-written Report, of
the Committee of Overtures concerning both the saids
Papers; As also the said shorter Paper, Read in their
Presence; The General Assembly, after mature Deliberation,
<pb n="510"/><anchor id="Pg510"/>
did Unanimously, and without a contrary
Vote, Approve the above written Report and Opinion
of the Committee of Overtures, in the hail Heads
thereof. Which being Intimate to the fore-named Persons,
they Acquiesced thereto. Upon all which the
following Act was made.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>Act <hi rend='italic'>anent Mr.</hi> Thomas Lining
<hi rend='italic'>and Others.</hi></head>

<p>
Whereas Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Thomas Lining</hi>, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Alexander
Schields</hi> and Mr. <hi rend='italic'>William Boyd</hi>, have presented
to this Assembly two Papers: One containing the
Expressions of their Purpose and Promise, of being
subject to the Authority of this Church, as formerly
Constituted, and now Restored, in its several Judicatories:
The other Offered for the Exoneration of their
Consciences. Which Paper, containing their Submission
and Subjection, did after the exhibition of the other
to the Assembly, Become Binding upon them, according
to the Promise therein made. Likeas, after that
other and longer Paper had been Read, before the
Committee of Overtures, It was exhibite to and received
by the Assembly; together with the Reasons
from the said Committee why it should not be Publickly
read in full Assembly. Which Reasons being duely
considered, and the said other Paper of Submission
and Subjection publickly Read, and Judicially Owned
by the forenamed Persons, in presence of the Assembly:
The Assembly did conclude by one single
Vote, that the foresaid longer Paper should not be
Read: And that the above named Persons should be
<pb n="511"/><anchor id="Pg511"/>
Received into the Fellowship of this Church, on the
Terms of Submission and Subjection contained in the
Shorter Paper: And after passing of the said Vote, and
that they were gravely Admonished by the Moderator
to walk Orderly in time coming, in Opposition to all
Schisme and Division; It was declared to them, by the
Moderator, in the Name of the Assembly, That the
Assembly did receive them into the Fellowship of this
Church, to enjoy the priviledges thereof, and Perform
the Duties therein, whereof they are, or shall be found
Capable. Whereupon, and at their desire, it was ordained
that this Act should be made; and an Extract
thereof given to them in good Form. <hi rend='italic'>Follows the Tenour
of the said shorter Paper.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>To the</hi> Moderator <hi rend='italic'>and Remanent Members of the
General Assembly of the Church of</hi> Scotland.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Right Reverend and Honourable,</hi>
</p>

<p>
<q>With the greatest Earnestness of longing we
have desired, and yet with a Patience perhaps
to excess, we have waited, for an Opportunity,
to bring our unhappy Differences (of which, all
Parties concerned are weary) to a Happy and Holy
close; And for this end to have access to apply our
selves to a full and free General Assembly of this
Church, invested with Authority and Power, <hi rend='italic'>in
foro Divino &amp; Humano,</hi> to Determine and Cognosce
upon them. The want of which an Assembly constitute
in that vigour, to which through the Mercy
<pb n="512"/><anchor id="Pg512"/>
of God, This Venerable National Synod hath arrived,
hath been the greatest let and impediment of
our composing these Differences, in a way, wherein
not only we, but all of the same Sentiments would
acquiesce. Now having obtained this much longed,
and long Prayed for priviledge; We cannot forbear
any longer, humbly, to Accost and Address this
Venerable Assembly, with a free and Ingenuous Representation
of our Minds and Desires. The scope of
which is, to Represent these things, which have been
most stumbling to us, for the exoneration of our
Consciences; and to declare our Design, after we
have exhibited our Testimony against these Courses,
which we understand to have been Corruptions and
Defections in this Church, And laid it down at the
Assemblies feet, to be disposed of, as their Wisdoms
shall think fit: That we shall in all Required Submission,
Subject our Selves, our Lives and
Doctrine, to the Cognizance of the Judicatories of
this Church, and shall equally oppose Schism and
Defection, in any Capacity, that we shall be found
Capable of. And here by these presents, we bind and
oblige our selves Faithfully, to live in Union, Communion
and intire Subjection, and due Obedience
in the Lord, to the Authority of this Church in her
Respective Judicatories: As witness our Hands at
<hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi> the 22 day of <hi rend='italic'>October</hi> 1690.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Thomas Lining.<lb/>
Alexander Shields,<lb/>
William Boyd.</hi>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n="513"/><anchor id="Pg513"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Edinburgh 28 of October 1690. <hi rend='italic'>Ante Meridiem,</hi> Sess.
11.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>VI. <hi rend='italic'>Act anent Ministers that observe not the publick Orders of
the Church.</hi></head>

<p>
The Assembly Recommends it to Presbyteries, to
take Notice of all Ministers, within their Bounds,
whether the late Conforming Incumbents, or others,
who shall not observe Fasts and Thanksgivings, Indicted
by the Church: Or who shall be found Guilty,
of any other Irregular Carriage, in administrating the
Sacraments in private, or Celebrating Clandestine
Marriages, without due Proclamation of Bans: And
to censure them accordingly.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Edinburgh 29 October 1690. <hi rend='italic'>Ante Meridiem,</hi> Sess.
12.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>VII. <hi rend='italic'>Act approving several Overtures.</hi></head>

<p>
This day the Overtures following were Read in
Presence of the Assembly.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'><hi rend='italic'>Anent subscribing the Confession of
Faith.</hi></note>
1. <q>For retaining soundness, and unity of Doctrine,
It is judged necessary, that all Probationers Licensed
to Preach, all Intrants into the Ministry, and all other
Ministers and Elders Received into Communion
with us, in Church Government, be obliged, to
Subscribe their Approbation of the Confession of
Faith, approven by former General Assemblies of
this Church, and Ratified in the second Session of
<pb n="514"/><anchor id="Pg514"/>
the Current Parliament: And that this be Recommended
to the Diligence of the several Presbyteries,
and they appointed to Record their Diligence thereanent
in their respective Registers.</q>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'><hi rend='italic'>Anent Papists.</hi></note>
2. <q>That it be Recommended to Presbyteries, to
take special Notice, what Papists are in their Bounds,
and that they take pains to Re-claim them, and to
Advert how their Children are Educat: and if need
be, to make Application to the Civil Authority concerning
them.</q>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'><hi rend='italic'>Anent Celebration of Marriage.</hi></note>
3. <q>That the Celebration of Marriage, without
due Proclamation of Bans, according to Order, three
several Sabbaths in the respective Parishes, be discharged:
And that it be recommended to Presbyteries,
to Censure the Contraveeners.</q>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'><hi rend='italic'>Against profanation of the Sabbath.</hi></note>
4. <q>That it be recommended to Kirk-Sessions and
Presbyteries, carefully to put in Execution, the Acts
of former General Assemblies against Profanation of
the Lords-day, and particularly by unnecessary Sailing
and Travelling.</q>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'><hi rend='italic'>Anent Mercats on</hi> Saturdays
<hi rend='italic'>and</hi> Mondays.</note>
5. <q>That Application be made to the Parliament:
for alerting all Mercats in Royal Burghs and other
places, on <hi rend='italic'>Saturdays</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Mondays</hi>.</q>
</p>

<p>
The General Assembly after mature Deliberation,
approves of these Overtures, and Recommends and
Appoints accordingly: And ordains the same to be
observed, and to have the Force and Strength of an Act
and Ordinance of Assembly.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="515"/><anchor id="Pg515"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>VIII. <hi rend='italic'>Act approving the Associations of Presbyteries.</hi></head>

<p>
The General Assembly, allows and approves of the
Ministers of different Presbyteries, their Associating
in Presbyteries; ay and while the Vacancies of
the saids Presbyteries be filled: And declares them to
have the Authority and Power of Presbyteries Respectively:
And that notwithstanding, that according
to the old Platform, the saids Ministers do reside in
the Bounds of different Presbyteries.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Edinburgh 31 October 1690, <hi rend='italic'>Ante Meridiem</hi> Sess. 15.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>IX. <hi rend='italic'>Act against Ministers Removing out of this Church.</hi></head>

<p>
The General Assembly does hereby appoint, that
no Ministers, who have actual standing and absolute
Relations, to any Charge in the Church of <hi rend='italic'>Scotland</hi>,
shall remove out of the Kingdom, without the
Consent of the Respective Judicatories of this Church.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="516"/><anchor id="Pg516"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>X. <hi rend='italic'>Act anent the Administration of the Sacraments.</hi></head>

<p>
The General Assembly considering, that the two
Sacraments, that Christ hath appointed under
the New Testament, <hi rend='italic'>viz. Baptism and the Lords Supper</hi>,
are his Solemn Ordinances, and Seals of the Covenant
of Grace (which is held forth in the Preaching of the
Gospel). And that in the use of them, the Parties receiving
them, are solemnly devoted and engaged to
God, before Angels and men; and are solemnly received,
as Members of the Church, and do entertain
Communion with her: And that by the Authority of
this Church in her former Assemblies. The private use
of them hath been condemned: As also, that by allowing
the private use of the same, in pretended Cases of Necessity;
The Superstitious opinion is nourished, that
they are necessary to Salvation, not only as commanded
Duties, but as means, without which Salvation cannot
be attained. Therefore, The Assembly hereby
discharges, the Administration of the Lords Supper, to
Sick Persons in their Houses, and all other use of the
same, except in the publick Assemblies of the Church.
And also doth discharge the Administration of Baptism
in private, That is, in any place, or at any time, when
the Congregation is not orderly called together, to wait
<pb n="517"/><anchor id="Pg517"/>
on the Dispensing of the Word. And appoints that
this be carefully observed, when and where ever the
Lord giveth his people Peace, Liberty and Opportunity
for their publick Assemblies. And ordains this present
Act to be publickly Intimate in all the Churches.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Edinburgh 11 November 1690. <hi rend='italic'>Post Meridiem</hi> Sess.
24.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>XI. <hi rend='italic'>Act approving Overtures anent the</hi> Irish
<hi rend='italic'>Bibles, &amp;c.</hi></head>

<p>
This day the Overtures following anent the <hi rend='italic'>Irish
Bibles, New Testaments</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Catechisms</hi>, were read
in presence of the Assembly.
</p>

<p>
1. That a Letter of Thanks be written to these
concerned, whether in this, or our Neighbour Nation,
for their Care of, and Liberal Charity towards
the <hi rend='italic'>Highlanders</hi> of this Kingdom, in their so Liberally
Contributing, for the saids <hi rend='italic'>Irish Bibles</hi>, &amp;c.
And that Mr. <hi rend='italic'>David Blair</hi> be appointed to write the
said Letter in the Name of this Assembly.
</p>

<p>
2. The whole Money so Charitably contributed,
being expended, Therefore, and for making up of
the same, and for Defraying of the necessary Charges
of Transporting the saids Bibles, &amp;c. to <hi rend='italic'>Scotland</hi>; It
is thought most needful, that there be an advance of
One thousand Pounds <hi rend='italic'>Scots</hi>, and that Their Majesties
Privy Council be supplicat, for as much of some
Vacant Stipends of Parishes, where the King is Patron,
as will make up the said sum for the ends foresaid.
</p>

<pb n="518"/><anchor id="Pg518"/>

<p>
3. That it be Recommended to the Kirk Sessions,
Heretors and others concerned in the <hi rend='italic'>Highlands</hi>, to
see the Act of Parliament anent Erecting of Schools
in every Parish, duely Execute, and the <hi rend='italic'>Fonds</hi> established
by Law, for the same, made effectual.
</p>

<p>
4. That it be Recommended to the Agent for the
Kirk, to Receive the foresaid sum, and to Deburse
the same at the sight of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Law</hi> and Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>David Blair</hi>, for the said use: And also to receive the
Books above-mentioned, being three Thousand <hi rend='italic'>Bibles</hi>,
one Thousand <hi rend='italic'>New Testaments</hi>, and three
Thousand <hi rend='italic'>Catechisms</hi>, from <hi rend='italic'>London</hi>.
</p>

<p>
5. That the several Synods, who have <hi rend='italic'>Highland
Parishes</hi> in their bounds, appoint one of their Number,
to receive their proportion, of the saids <hi rend='italic'>Bibles</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>New Testaments</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>Catechisms</hi>: And that
in order thereto, the Ministers and Elders having Interest in
the <hi rend='italic'>Highlands</hi>, present in this Assembly, shall meet
and appoint some to receive these <hi rend='italic'>Bibles</hi>, &amp;c. And
proportion the number that each Parish shall have
thereof.
</p>

<p>
6. That it be Recommended to the Ministers,
concerned in the <hi rend='italic'>Highlands</hi>, to dispatch the whole
Paraphrase of the <hi rend='italic'>Irish Psalms</hi>, to the Press. And if
the Principal Copy can be Recovered, to expede the
same; But that any other Copy they have, be Revised
by the Synod of <hi rend='italic'>Argyle</hi>, and being approven by
them; That the same be Printed.
</p>

<p>
The Assembly having considered these Overtures,
they approve thereof, and Recommend and Appoint
accordingly.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n="519"/><anchor id="Pg519"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>At</hi> Edinburgh, November 12. 1690.
<hi rend='italic'>Post Meridiem.</hi> Sess. 25.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>XII. <hi rend='italic'>Act anent a Solemn National Fast and Humiliation, with
the Causes thereof.</hi></head>

<p>
The General Assembly, Having taken into their
most serious Consideration, the late great and
general Defection of this Church and Kingdom; Have
though fit to Appoint a Day of Solemn Humiliation
and Fasting, for Confession of Sins, and making Supplication
to Our Gracious GOD, to Forgive and Remove
the guilt thereof; In order whereunto, they have
Ordained the Confession of Sins, and Causes of Fasting
following, to be duely Intimate and Published; Recommending
it most earnestly to all persons, both Ministers
and Others, That every One of us may not only
search and try our own Hearts and Wayes, and stir up
Ourselves to seek the Lord; But also in our Stations,
and as we have access, Deal with one another, in all
Love and Tenderness, to prepare for so great and necessary
a Duty, that we may find mercy in God's sight,
and He may be graciously Reconciled to our Land in
the Lord Jesus, and take delight to dwell among us.
</p>

<p>
Although our gracious God hath of late, for His
own Name sake wrought great and wonderful things,
for <hi rend='italic'>Britain</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi>,
and for this Church and Nation
in particular; Yet the Inhabitants thereof have cause
to remember their own evil wayes, and to loath themselves
in their own sight for their Iniquities. Alas!
<pb n="520"/><anchor id="Pg520"/>
Alas! We and our Fathers, our Princes, our Pastors,
and People of all Ranks have sinned, and have been under
great Transgression to this day: For though our
gracious God shewed early kindness to this Land, in
sending the Gospel among us, and afterward in our Reformation
from Popish Superstition and Idolatry; and
It had the Honour, beyond many Nations of being
after our first Reformation, Solemnly devoted unto
God, both Prince and People; yet we have dealt treacherously
with the Lord, and been unstedfast in His Covenant,
and have not walked suitably to our Mercies
received from Him, nor obligations to Him. Through
the mercy of God this Church had attained to a great
purity of Doctrine, Worship and Government, but
this was not accompanied with suitable personal Reformation,
neither was our Fruit answerable to the pains
taken on us by Word and Work; We had much Gospel-preaching,
but too little Gospel-practice, too many
went on in open wickedness, and some had but a form
of Godliness, denying the power thereof: Many also
who had the Grace of God in truth fell from their first
love, and fell under sad languishings and decays; and
when for our sins the Anger of the Lord had divided us,
and we were brought under the feet of strangers, and
many of our brethren killed, and others taken captive
and sold as slaves; yet we sinned still, and after we
were freed from the yoak of strangers, instead of returning
to the Lord, and being led to Repentance by
His Goodness, the Land made open Defection from
the good ways of the Lord: Many behaved as if they
had been delivered to work abomination, the flood-gates
<pb n="521"/><anchor id="Pg521"/>
of Impiety were opened, and a deluge of wickednese
did overspread the Land. Who can without grief
and shame remember the shameful debauchery and
drunkenness that then was? And this accompanied
with horrid and hellish cursing and swearing, and followed
with frequent Filthiness, Adulteries and other
Abominations, and the Reprover was hated, and he
that departed from Iniquity made himself a Reproach
of Prey. And when by these, and such like corrupt
practices, mens Consciences were debauched, they proceeded
to sacrifice the Interest of the Lord Jesus Christ,
and priviledges of his Church to the lusts and will of
Men; The Supremacy was advanced in such a way,
and to such an height, as never any Christian Church
acknowledged; The Government of the Church was
altered, and Prelacie (which hath been always grievous
to this Nation) introduced, without the Churches
consent, and contrary to the standing Acts of our National
Assemblies, both which the present Parliament
hath (blessed be God) lately found; And yet nevertheless,
of the then standing Ministry of <hi rend='italic'>Scotland</hi>, many
did suddenly and readily comply with that alteration of
the Government, some out of Pride and Covetousness,
or Man-pleasing, some through infirmity or weakness,
or fear of Man, and want of Courage and Zeal for God;
many faithful Ministers were thereupon cast out, and
many Insufficient and Scandalous Men thrust in on
their Charges, and many Families ruined, because they
would not own them as their Pastors.
</p>

<p>
And alas! It is undenyable, there hath been under
the late Prelacie, a great decay of Piety, so that it was
<pb n="522"/><anchor id="Pg522"/>
enough to make a man be nicknam'd a Phanatick, if he
did not run to the same excess of Riot with others.
</p>

<p>
And should it not be lamented, for it cannot be denied,
that there hath been in some a dreadful Atheistical
Boldness against God, some have disputed the Beeing of
GOD, and His Providence, the Divine Authority of
the Scriptures, the Life to come, and Immortality of
the Soul, yes and scoffed at these things.
</p>

<p>
There hath been also an Horrid Prophanation of the
Holy and Dreadful Name of GOD, by cursing and
swearing: Ah! there hath been so much Swearing
and Forswearing amongst us, that no Nation under
Heaven hath been more guilty in this than we; some
by swearing rashly or ignorantly, some falsly, by breaking
their Oaths. And imposing and taking ungodly unlawful
Oaths and Bonds, whereby the Consciences of
many have been polluted and seared, and many ruined
and oppressed for refusing and not taking them.
</p>

<p>
There hath also been a great neglect of the worship
of God, too much in publick, but especially in Families
and in secret.
</p>

<p>
The wonted care of Religious sanctifying the Lord's
Day is gone, and in many places the Sabbath hath been
and is shamefully prophaned.
</p>

<p>
The Land also hath been, full of bloody Crimes,
and Cities full of Violence, and much innocent Blood
shed, so that Blood touched Blood, yea, <hi rend='italic'>Sodoms</hi> sins
have abounded amongst us. Pride, fulness of Bread,
Idleness, Vanities of Apparel, and shameful sensuality
filled the Land.
</p>

<p>
And Alas! how great hath been the Cry of Oppression
<pb n="523"/><anchor id="Pg523"/>
and Unrighteousness, Iniquity hath been established
by a Law, there hath been a great perverting
of Justice, by making and executing unrighteous Statutes
and Acts, and sad persecutions of many for
their Conscience towards God.
</p>

<p>
It is also matter of Lamentation, that under this
great Defection, there hath been too general a fainting
not only amongst Professours of the Gospel, but also
amongst Ministers; yea, even amongst such, who in
the main things did endeavour to maintain their Integrity,
in not giving seasonable and necessary Testimony
against the Defections and Evils of the Time, and
keeping a due distance from them, and some on the
other hand managed their Zeal with too little Discretion
and Meekness.
</p>

<p>
It is also matter of Humiliation, that when Differences
fell out amongst these, who did own Truth, and bear
witness against the Course of Defection, they were
not managed with due Charity and Love, but with too
much heat and bitterness, injurious Reflections used
against Pious and Worthy men on all hands, and scandalous
Divisions occasioned, and the Success of the
Gospel greatly obstructed thereby, and some dangerous
Principles drunk in: And after all this, there were
shameful advances towards Popery, the abomination
of the Mass was set up in many places, and Popish
Schools erected, and severals fell to Idolatry.
</p>

<p>
And though the Lord hath put a stop to the Course
of Defection, and of his great mercy given us some
reviving from our Bondage; yet we have sad cause to
regrate and bemoan, that few have a due sense of our
<pb n="524"/><anchor id="Pg524"/>
mercy, or walk answerable thereto; Few are turned to
the Lord in truth, but the wicked go on to do wickedly;
And there is found amongst us to this day, shameful
ingratitude for our mercies, Horrid impenitency under
our sins, yea, even among those, who stand most
up for the defence of the Truth: And amongst many
in our Armies, there is woful Prophanness and Debauchery.
And though we profess to acknowledge, there
can be no Pardon of Sins, no Peace and Reconciliation
with God, but by the Blood of Jesus Christ; Yet few
know Him, or see the Necessity and Excellency of the
Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ; few see their need
of him, or esteem, desire, or receive him as he is offered in
the Gospel; few are acquainted with Faith in Jesus
Christ, and living by Faith in Him, as made of the Father
unto us, wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and
Redemption; And few walk as becometh the Gospel, and
imitate our Holy Lord in Humility, Meekness, Self-denial,
Heavenly mindedness, Zeal for GOD, and Charity
towards Men: But as there is even untill now, a great
contempt of the Gospel, a great Barrenness under it; So
a deep Security under our sin and Danger, a great want
of Piety toward God, and Love towards Men, with a
woful Selfishness, every one seeking their own things,
few the things of Christ, or the publick Good, or one
anothers welfare: And finally, the most part more ready
to Censure the sins of others, than to Repent of their own.
</p>

<p>
Our Iniquities are increased over our Heads, and
our Trespasses are grown up unto the Heavens, they
are many in number, and hainous in their nature, and
grievously aggravated, as having been contrary to
<pb n="525"/><anchor id="Pg525"/>
great Light and Love, under signal Mercies and Judgments,
after Confession and Supplication, and notwithstanding
of our Profession, Promises and solemn Vowing,
and Covenanting with God to the contrary.
</p>

<p>
Have we not then sad cause of deep Sorrow and Humiliation?
And may we not fear, if we do not repent,
and turn from the evil of our wayes, and return to the
Lord with all our hearts, that he return to do us evil,
after He hath done us good, and be angry with us,
until he hath consumed us?
</p>

<p>
Let us therefore humble our selves by fasting and
Praying, let us search out our sins, and consider
our wayes, and confess these, and other our sins, with
Sorrow and Detestation; Let us Turn unto the Lord
with fasting and weeping, and with mourning; Let
us firmly resolve and sincerely Engage to amend our
wayes and doings, and return unto the Lord our God,
with all our hearts, and earnestly pray, that for the
Blood of the Lamb of God, our sins may be forgiven,
and our back slidings healed, and we may yet become
a Righteous Nation, keeping the Truth, that Religion
and Righteousness may flourish, and Love and
Charity abound, and all the Lords People may be of
one mind in the Lord: And in order to all these, that
the word of the Lord may have free course, and be
glorified, and that the Preaching of the Word, and
Dispensing of the Sacraments, may be accompanied
with the wonted Presence, Power and Blessing of the
Spirit of the Lord, That the Lord would Preserve and
bless our gracious <hi rend='italic'>King</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Queen</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>William</hi>
and <hi rend='italic'>Mary</hi>,
and establish their Throne by Righteousness and Religion,
and grant to these Nations, Peace and Truth
<pb n="526"/><anchor id="Pg526"/>
together; And for that End, bless and prosper His
Majesties Councils, and Forces by Sea and Land, and
these of the Princes and States his Allies, for God and
his Truth; That inferior Rulers may Rule in the fear
of God and Judges be cloathed with Righteousness,
and that many faithful Labourers may be sent out into
the Lord's Vineyard, and they who are sent, may find
mercy to be Faithful, and be blest with Success; That
Families may be as little Churches of Christ, and that
the Lord would pour out His Spirit on all Ranks of
People, that they may be Holy in all manner of Conversation,
and God may delight to dwell amongst us
and to do us good.
</p>

<p>
And while we pray for our selves, let us not forget
our Brethren in Foreign Churches, with whom, alas!
we had too little Sympathy; Nay let us pray, that all
the Ends of the Earth, may see the Salvation of God;
And that he would bring His ancient people of the
<hi rend='italic'>Jews</hi> to the Acknowledgment of Jesus Christ; And
that he would hasten the Ruine of Romish Babylon
and advance the Reformation in Christendome, and
preserve and bless the Reformed Churches; That he
would pitie His oppressed People, the <hi rend='italic'>French Protestants</hi>,
and gather them out of all places, whither they
have been scattered in the cloudy and dark day; And
that He would be the Defence, Strength and Salvation
of any of His People, who are in War or Danger by
Infidel or Popish adversaries, in <hi rend='italic'>Europe</hi> or
<hi rend='italic'>America:</hi> And
in particular, that the Lord would be Gracious to <hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi>,
and sanctifie to His People there, both their distress
and Deliverance, and perfect what concerneth
<pb n="527"/><anchor id="Pg527"/>
them, that he would Convert the Natives there to the
Truth, Reduce that Land to Peace; And appoint Salvation
for Walls and Bulwarks to <hi rend='italic'>Brittain</hi>.
</p>

<p>
For all these Causes and Reasons, The General
Assembly hath Appointed the Second Thursday of <hi rend='italic'>January</hi>
next, to be Observed in all the Congregations
of this Church and Nation, as a day of Solemn Fasting
and Humiliation, and Prayer; Beseeching and Obtesting
all, both Pastors and People, of all Ranks to be
sincere and serious, in Humiliation and Supplication,
and universal Reformation, as they would wish to find
mercy of the Lord and have deserved wrath averted,
and would obtain the Blessing of the Lord upon themselves
and Posterity after them; And that the Lord may
delight in us, and our Land may be as Married to Him.
And Ordains all Ministers, either in Kirks or Meeting
houses, to Read this present Act publickly from the
Pulpit, a Sabbath or two before the said Day of Humiliation:
and that the several Presbyteries take care,
that it be carefully observed in their Respective bounds.
And where, in regard of Vacancies, the Day hereby
appointed, cannot be observed; The Assembly appoints
the said Humiliation to be kept some other Day
with the first convenient opportunity. And Appoints
the Commission for Visitation, to apply to the Council
for their Civil Sanction to the Observation thereof.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="528"/><anchor id="Pg528"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>XIII. <hi rend='italic'>Act anent Sentences past against Ministers from the
Year 1650. &amp;c.</hi></head>

<p>
The General Assembly does hereby declare, all
Sentences, past against any Ministers <hi rend='italic'>Hinc Inde</hi>,
by any Church Judicatory, upon the Account of the
late Differences among Presbyterians, from the Year
1650. Till the Re-introduction of Prelacy, to be of
themselves void and null, to all Effects and Intents.
And Siclike the General Assembly hereby Recommends,
to the Respective Presbyteries, to take care,
that such of these Ministers, as are not otherways disposed
of by the Church, Return to the exercise of their
Ministry, in their Respective Congregations. And
also hereby Recommends to the Civil Magistrate, that
the saids Ministers may have the Lega Maintainances
and Stipends where they served.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n="529"/><anchor id="Pg529"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Edinburgh 13 of November 1690. <hi rend='italic'>Post Meridiem.</hi>
Sess. 26.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>XIV. <hi rend='italic'>The Assemblies Letter to His Majesty.</hi></head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>May it please Your Majesty.</hi>
</p>

<p>
The Happiness we have had by Your Majesties
influence, as an Instrument in the Hand of God,
towards us for good, and the Countenance You have
given us in Holding this National Assembly of the
Church of <hi rend='italic'>Scotland</hi>, Doth Encourage us to make Application
again to Your Majesty; That as in our Answer
to Your Gracious Letter direct to us in the Entrance
of this Assembly, we Engaged to Your Majesty
that in all things that should come before us, we would
carry with that Calmnes and Moderation, which becometh
the Ministers of the Gospel of Peace, and which
Your Majesty did so effectually Recommend to us; So
now in the Close of this our Assembly, we presume to
acquaint Your Majesty, That through the good Hand
of God upon us, we have in a great measure performed
accordingly: Having applied our selves, mostly and
especially, to what concerned this whole Church, and
endeavoured by all means Ecclesiastical, and proper for
us, to promote the Good thereof, together with the
Quiet of the Kingdom, and Your Majesties Satisfaction
and Contentment. And God hath been pleased to
Bless our Endeavours, in our Receiving to the Unity
and Order of this Church, some who had withdrawn,
and now have joyned with us, and promised Subjection:
And in providing for the Propagation of Religion,
<pb n="530"/><anchor id="Pg530"/>
and the Knowledge of God, in the most Barbarous
places of the <hi rend='italic'>Highlands</hi>, which may be the surest
way of Reducing these people also unto Your Majesties
Obedience: And especially in Regulating the Ministers
of this Church, after so great Revolutions and
Alterations: For we have according to the use and
practice of this Church, ever since the first Reformation
from Popery, appointed Visitations both for the
Southern and Northern parts of this Kingdom, Consisting
of the Gravest and most Experienced Ministers
and Elders: To whom we have given Instructions about
the late Conformists, that none of them shall be
Removed from their Places, but such as are either Insufficient,
or Scandalous, or Erroneous, or Supinely Negligent:
And that these of them be admitted to Ministerial
Communion with us, who upon due Trial, and
in a Competent Time for that Trial, shall be found
to be Orthodox in Doctrine, of Competent Abilities,
of a Godly, Peaceable, and Loyal Conversation, and
who shall be judged Faithfull to God and to the Government:
And who shall likewayes Promise to own,
Submit unto, and Concurre with it. We have also
taken Care, that all persons, who shall be found to
have received wrong, in any Inferior Judicatory of this
Church, shall be duly Redressed: Other things which
are not of so Universal a Concern, we have delayed
till the next General Assembly. This Account Great
SIR, we look upon our selves as Obliged to give unto
Your Majesty, for that great Goodness, You have
been pleased to express, in giving such Countenance
to this Assembly, and in appointing such Commissioner
<pb n="531"/><anchor id="Pg531"/>
to Represent Your Royal Person, who hath
been in all his Conduct in this Affair, most acceptable
unto us. That God may Bless Your Majesty, and our
most Gracious Queen, with all Blessings, which concern
both this Life, and the Life to come, is the earnest
Prayer of.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>May it please your Majesty,<lb/>
Your Majesties most Faithful,<lb/>
Most Humble and most Obedient,<lb/>
Subjects and Servants.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Subscribed in Name, and at the Appointment
of the General Assembly, by
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>HU. KENNEDIE.</hi> Moderator.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>XV. <hi rend='italic'>Instructions to the Commissions for Visitations on the South
and North sides of Tay.</hi></head>

<p>
The following Instructions to the Commission for
Visitations on this side of <hi rend='italic'>Tay</hi>, were Read in presence
of the Assembly.
</p>

<p>
<q>1. That there be appointed by the Assembly, a
Delegate number of the most experienced Ministers
<pb n="532"/><anchor id="Pg532"/>
and Elders. This number to be Forty Ministers,
and Twenty Ruling Elders, fifteen of them to a
<hi rend='italic'>Quorum</hi>, ten of these being alwayes Ministers; And
that they at their first Session, Choose their Moderator
and Clerk; And for the Sub-committe betwixt
the Quarterly Meetings, nine to be the <hi rend='italic'>Quorum</hi>,
six of these being alwayes Ministers.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>2. That the Work of this Commission for Visitations
be, to take to their Cognizance all References,
and Appeals, and other things, which being
stated before this Assembly, shall by them be specially
Referred to the said Commission, to determine
the same.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>3. That the Commission give their Opinion to all
Presbyteries and Synods, who shall apply to them
for the same, in difficult Cases: and though Presbyteries
shall not apply, yet if the Commission shall
be informed of any Precipitant, or unwarrantable
procedure of Presbyteries, in Processes, which
may prove of ill Consequence to the Church, The
Commission shall interpose their Advice, to such
Presbyteries, to sift such procedure, till either the
Synod, or next General Assembly take Cognizance
of it; if the said Commission shall not find a present
fit Expedient, to direct them, for bringing the
matter sooner to a Right Conclusion.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>4. That in discussing References, Appeals and
Bills, They take care to purge out all, who upon
due Tryal shall be found to be Insufficient,
supinely Negligent, Scandalous or Erroneous.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>5. That this Commission shall have Power of
<pb n="533"/><anchor id="Pg533"/>
Visiting any Ministers within the Bounds of any
Presbyteries, on this side of the Water of <hi rend='italic'>Tay</hi>, as
they shall find need: And that this Power Reach
Presbyterians as well as others.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>6. That they shall be Careful, that none shall be
admitted by them to Ministerial Communion, or
to a share of the Government; but such as upon
due Tryal (for which the Commission is to take a
competent time) shall be found to be Orthodox in
their Doctrine, of Competent Abilities, having a
Pious, Godly, Loyal and Peaceable Conversation,
as becometh a Minister of the Gospel, of an Edifying
Gift, and whom the Commission shall have
ground to believe, will be True and Faithful to
God and the Government, and diligent in their Ministerial
Duties. And that all who shall be admitted
to the Ministry, or shall be received to a share in the
Government, shall be obliged to Own and Subscribe
the <hi rend='italic'>Confession of Faith</hi>, and profess their Submission
to, and willingness to Joyn and Concur with
the Presbyterian Church-Government.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>7. That they be very Cautions of receiving Informations,
against the late Conformists, and that
they proceed in the matter of Censure, very Deliberatly,
so as none may have just cause to complain
of their Rigiditie: Yet so as to omit no means of Information.
And that they shall not proceed to censure,
but upon Relevant Libels and sufficient Probation.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>8. That this Commission do not take on them, to
meddle with any thing, not expressed in their Commission:
<pb n="534"/><anchor id="Pg534"/>
And that it be declared, that this Commission
is only given, <hi rend='italic'>Ad hunc effectum &amp; pro præsenti
Ecclesiæ statu</hi>.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>9. That this commission be in all their actings,
Countable to, and Censurable by the next Ensuing
General Assembly.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>10. That this commission continue till the first of
<hi rend='italic'>November</hi> next: and in case the General Assembly
Interveen; Then this Commission is to Terminate
at the meetting of the said Assembly.</q>
</p>

<p>
The General Assembly approves these Instructions,
for the said Commission for Visitations on the South-side
of <hi rend='italic'>Tay</hi>: And ordains the same also to serve for the
Visitors that are to be appointed for the North.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>XVI. <hi rend='italic'>Commission for Visitations on the South side of</hi>
Tay.</head>

<p>
The General Assembly Considering, that there are
many Important and weighty Affairs, Processes,
Appeals, and References, Tabled before this Assembly,
which the Assembly could not overtake, for want of
time to consider them naturely; Does therefore Nominate
and Authorize a Commission of Ministers and
Elders, for Visitation of the whole Presbyteries, on
the South-side of <hi rend='italic'>Tay</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi> Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>Hugh Kennedy</hi>, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Vetch</hi>, Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>John Law</hi>, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Gabriel Semple</hi>, Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>Gilbert Rule</hi>, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>James Kirtoun</hi>, Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>William Areskyne</hi>,
<pb n="535"/><anchor id="Pg535"/>
Mr. <hi rend='italic'>William Weir</hi>, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>William Crichtoun</hi>,
Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Anderson</hi> of <hi rend='italic'>Perth</hi>, Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>Alexander Pitcairn</hi>, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Richard
Howison<hi rend='italic'>, Mr. </hi>George Campbel</hi>, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John
Lawrie</hi>, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Archibald Hamiltoun</hi>, Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>Patrick Peacock</hi>, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Spalding</hi>, Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>Michael Bruce</hi>, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Gabriel Cuningham</hi>,
Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Patrick Warner</hi>, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Alexander Forbes</hi>,
Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Hutcheson</hi>, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>William Eccles</hi>,
Mr. <hi rend='italic'>James Vetch</hi>, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Patrick Simpson</hi>, Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>Matthew Crawford</hi>, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>William
Legat</hi>, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Neil Gillies</hi>, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Thomas
Forrester</hi>, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Andrew Mortoun</hi>, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Robert
Duncanson</hi>, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Bannatyne</hi>, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>William
Ker</hi>, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>William Vilant</hi>, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Robert
Rule</hi>, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>James Frazer</hi>, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>George
Meldrum</hi> at <hi rend='italic'>Kilnining</hi>, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>David Blair</hi>,
Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Samuel Nairn</hi>, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Edward
Jamieson</hi>, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>James Rymer</hi> Ministers: and the Earl
of <hi rend='italic'>Crawford</hi>, the Earl of <hi rend='italic'>Sutherland</hi>, the
Viscount of <hi rend='italic'>Arburthnet</hi>, the Lord <hi rend='italic'>Halcraig</hi>,
the Lord <hi rend='italic'>Aberuchil</hi>, the Laird of <hi rend='italic'>Cimistoun</hi>,
Sir <hi rend='italic'>John Hall</hi> Provest of <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>,
Sir <hi rend='italic'>John Riddel</hi>, the Laird of <hi rend='italic'>Greenknows</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Archibald Muir</hi> late Baylie of <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>James M<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>c</hi>lurgh</hi> Dean of
Gild, <hi rend='italic'>George Stirling</hi> Deacon Conveener, the Laird of
<hi rend='italic'>Naughtoun</hi>, the Laird of <hi rend='italic'>Meggans</hi>, the Laird
of <hi rend='italic'>Leuquhat</hi>, Sir <hi rend='italic'>Thomas Stewart</hi>, the Laird
of <hi rend='italic'>Glanderstoun</hi>, the Laird of <hi rend='italic'>Lamingtoun</hi>,
Provest <hi rend='italic'>Muir</hi> of <hi rend='italic'>Air</hi>, and the
Laird of <hi rend='italic'>Grange Hamiltoun</hi> Ruling Elders: To meet
for their first Diet at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi> the fourteenth day of
<hi rend='italic'>November</hi> Instant, Fifteen of them being a
<hi rend='italic'>Quorum</hi>, whereof Ten are to be alwayes Ministers: And of
their Sub-Committee in the Interval of their Quarterly
Meetings, Nine to be a <hi rend='italic'>Quorum</hi>, Six of these being
always Ministers, who only are to Rippen and prepare
Matters for the Quarterly Meetings. And their next
<pb n="536"/><anchor id="Pg536"/>
Quarterly Meeting to be at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi> the Third
<hi rend='italic'>Wednesday</hi> of <hi rend='italic'>January</hi> thereafter. And their
next Quarterly Meeting to be on the Third <hi rend='italic'>Wednesday</hi> of
<hi rend='italic'>April</hi>. And
if afterwards the said Commission shall think fit, to appoint
other Quarterly Meetings, they may do as they
see Expedient With full Power to them and their Sub-Commission
foresaid, to give Warrand for Citing Parties
upon Fifteen free dayes. And the said Commission,
being only appointed, <hi rend='italic'>Ad hunc effectum &amp; pro prasentes
Ecclesia Statu</hi>, Therefore, The Assembly Recommends
particularly to the said Commission, to take
Cognizance of, and finally determine in the particulars
following, specially Committed and Referred to them,
by this Assembly, <hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi> The Purging and Planting of
the City and Presbytery of <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>: The transportation
of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Robert Wyse</hi> to <hi rend='italic'>Hamiltoun</hi>: The
Proces of the Heretors and People of <hi rend='italic'>Peebles</hi>: The Processes,
of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Thomas Wood</hi> at <hi rend='italic'>Dumbar</hi>, of Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>Robert Spotswood</hi> at <hi rend='italic'>Abbotsrule</hi>, Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>John Bowes</hi> at <hi rend='italic'>Abbotshail</hi>, Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>Patrick Lyon</hi> at <hi rend='italic'>Kinghorm</hi>, Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>Symon Compar</hi> at <hi rend='italic'>Dumfermling</hi>,
Mr. <hi rend='italic'>William Crawford</hi> at <hi rend='italic'>Lady-Kirk</hi>, Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>James Orr</hi> at <hi rend='italic'>Huttoun</hi>, Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>Adam Peacock</hi> at <hi rend='italic'>Morbassie</hi>, Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>Daniel Urquhart</hi> at <hi rend='italic'>Clackmannan</hi>, Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>George Monro</hi> at <hi rend='italic'>Dollar</hi>,
Mr. <hi rend='italic'>George Shaw</hi> at <hi rend='italic'>Logie</hi>, Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>Alexander Ireland</hi> at <hi rend='italic'>Fossoway</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Tilliboal</hi>, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Robert Sharp</hi> at
<hi rend='italic'>Muckart</hi>, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>James Grahame</hi> at
<hi rend='italic'>Dumfermling</hi>, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>George Gray</hi>
at <hi rend='italic'>Beath</hi>, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Monro</hi> at
<hi rend='italic'>Stirling</hi>, and Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Skinner</hi>
at <hi rend='italic'>Bathkenner</hi>: The Petition of the Magistrates of
<hi rend='italic'>Perth</hi>, and Reference anent Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John
Anderson</hi> there: The Processes of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>William Alison</hi> at
<hi rend='italic'>Kilboche</hi>, and Mr. <hi rend='italic'>James Cowper</hi> at
<hi rend='italic'>Humbie</hi>: Some Reference of the
<pb n="537"/><anchor id="Pg537"/>
Synod of <hi rend='italic'>Merse</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Teviotdial</hi> to the
Assembly, <hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi> One anent Doctor <hi rend='italic'>Canaries</hi>,
and another anent Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Kirktoun</hi> and Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>Jameson's</hi> returning to their Charges,
or else to Dimit; And a third anent Mr. <hi rend='italic'>William Crawfurd</hi>
Deposed, to procure him some Lively hood, because
of his Age and Infirmity, and some others given
in to the Clerk therewith from the said Synod: The
Affair anent Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Duncan Campbel</hi> and the Parishes of
<hi rend='italic'>Dinnoon</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Kilmorn</hi>: The Process of Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>Robert Glasford</hi> at <hi rend='italic'>Auchterderen</hi>: The
Reference from the Presbyterie of <hi rend='italic'>Stirling</hi>, for advice anent Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>Patrick Cowpar</hi>: The Petitions of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>William
Hamiltoun</hi> and Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Hugh Nisbet</hi>: The Petition of Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>Alexander Strang</hi>,
anent his Clerks Fies. This Commission is also to Correspond
with the State, anent Fasts and Thanksgivings,
and their Causes, if the Occasions thereof fall out during
the time of their sitting: Also to take the Monitory
paper to consideration, and see what use is to be made
of it: To consider what Acts of Assembly are fit to
be Printed together, and order the same. To consider
the form of process, being first Revised by the Lord
<hi rend='italic'>Aberuchil</hi> and the Lord
<hi rend='italic'>Halcraig</hi>. And to apply to the
Privy Council for their Civil Sanction to the observation
of the Fast. And this Commission is to walk in
all things, according to the particular Instructions given
unto them by this Assembly. And in all their Actings
they shall be countable to and Censurable by the
next General Assembly. And this Commission to Continue
till the first of November next, or the diet, that
shall be appointed for the next General Assembly.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="538"/><anchor id="Pg538"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>XVII. <hi rend='italic'>Commission for Visitations on the North side of</hi>
Tay.</head>

<p>
The General Assembly taking to their Consideration
the necessity of Purging and Planting of the
Churches on the North side of <hi rend='italic'>Tay</hi>, do by their Ecclesiastical
Authority, Nominat, Appoint and Authorize
their Reverend Brethren Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Hugh Kennedy</hi>, Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>John Law</hi>, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>William Crichtoun</hi>, Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>Edward Jamieson</hi>, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Robert Rule</hi>, Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>James Rymer</hi>, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>James Frazer</hi>, Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>Alexander Forbes</hi>, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Anderson</hi> at
Perth, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>George Meldrum</hi> at <hi rend='italic'>Kitwining</hi>,
Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Thomas Ramsay</hi>, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Andrew Bowie</hi>, Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>Robert Young</hi>, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>William Legat</hi>, and Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>William Mackie</hi>, Ministers: And
the Lord Viscount of <hi rend='italic'>Arbuthnet</hi>, the Laird of
<hi rend='italic'>Meggins</hi>, the Laird of <hi rend='italic'>Naughtoun</hi>, the Laird
of <hi rend='italic'>Leuquhat</hi>, and the Laird of <hi rend='italic'>Greenknows</hi>,
Ruling Elders: To joyn with the Ministers and Elders in the North after-mentioned;
<hi rend='italic'>Viz.</hi> Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Stewart</hi>, Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>James Urquhart</hi>, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Alexander
Dumbar</hi>, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Alexander Frazer</hi>, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Thomas
Hogg</hi>, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Hugh Henryson</hi>, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>William
Mackay</hi>, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Walter Dinnoon</hi>, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>George
Meldrum</hi> of <hi rend='italic'>Glass</hi>, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Arthur Mitchel</hi>,
Mr. <hi rend='italic'>William Ramsay</hi>, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Francis
Melvil</hi>, and Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Mculloch</hi>, Ministers: together
With the Earle of <hi rend='italic'>Sutherland</hi>, the Laird of
<hi rend='italic'>Brodie</hi>, the Laird of <hi rend='italic'>Grant</hi>, the Laird of
<hi rend='italic'>Grange Dumbar</hi>, the
<pb n="539"/><anchor id="Pg539"/>
Laird of <hi rend='italic'>Eight</hi>, the Laird of <hi rend='italic'>Culloden</hi>, the
Laird of <hi rend='italic'>Darfolly</hi>, the Laird of <hi rend='italic'>Parkhay</hi>,
Sir <hi rend='italic'>John Monro</hi>, Sir. <hi rend='italic'>George Monro</hi>, Sir
<hi rend='italic'>Robert Gordon</hi> of <hi rend='italic'>Embo</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>David Frazer</hi> of <hi rend='italic'>Maine</hi>, Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>John Campbel</hi> of <hi rend='italic'>Moy</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Hector Monro</hi> of <hi rend='italic'>Drummond</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Alexander Duff</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>Robert Martyne</hi> of
<hi rend='italic'>Burnbrae</hi>, Ruling Elders: To
be a Commission for Visiting the whole Presbyteries on
the North-side of the Water of <hi rend='italic'>Tay</hi>, In Planting Vacant
Churches Constituting Elderships in Congregations,
Trying &amp; Purging out of Insufficient, Negligent, Scandalous
and Erroneous Ministers, by due course of Ecclesiastical
Process and Censures, according to the Particular
Instructions, given them thereanent, and for that
effect, to have their first Dyet of meeting, at <hi rend='italic'>Aberdeen</hi>,
the Second <hi rend='italic'>Wednesday</hi> of <hi rend='italic'>March</hi> next, and
thereafter to appoint the own Dyets and Places of meeting, as they
see Expedient, with full Power to them, or their
<hi rend='italic'>Quorum</hi> being seven Ministers and three Ruling Elders,
to Issue out Warrants for Citing of Parties upon fifteen
Free dayes, to Cognosce, Determine and finally decide,
in planting of Vacant Churches, Constituting
Elderships, and Trying and Purging out, all Insufficient,
Negligent, Scandalous and Erroneous Ministers,
conforme to the particular Instructions given
them thereanent. They being alwayes Countable to,
and Censurable by the next General Assembly of this
Church: And this Commission to continue till the
first of <hi rend='italic'>November</hi> next, or the Dyet that shall be appointed
for the next General Assembly.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="540"/><anchor id="Pg540"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>XVIII. <hi rend='italic'>Commission for</hi> Mr. Gilbert Rule
<hi rend='italic'>and</hi> Mr. David Blair,
<hi rend='italic'>to wait upon His Majesty anent the Affairs of this Church.</hi></head>

<p>
The General Assembly judging it Expedient, to
send two of their Number to <hi rend='italic'>London</hi>, to attend
his Majesty, anent the Affairs of this Church; Does
therefore Nominate and Appoint their Reverend Brethren,
<hi rend='italic'>Mr. Gilbert Rule</hi>, one of the Ministers of the
City of <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, and Principal of the Colledge thereof,
and Mr. <hi rend='italic'>David Blair</hi> another of the Ministers of the
said City; with all convenient speed to Repair to <hi rend='italic'>London</hi>,
to attend His Majesty for the end foresaid: And
Refers the Instructions to be given them, and what other
things Concern their Journey, to the Commission
for Visitations on the South side of <hi rend='italic'>Tay</hi> appointed by
this Assembly.
</p>

</div>

<div>

<p>
This Assembly being Dissolved, and the next General
Assemly appointed to be held at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi> the
first day of <hi rend='italic'>November</hi> next to come; the Members
were dismissed with Prayer, Singing of the 133 Psalm,
and pronouncing of the Blessing.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Collected, Visied and Extracted, from the
Records of the said Assembly by Me</hi>
JOHN SPALDING <hi rend='italic'>Cls. Syn: National.</hi>
</p>

<p>
FINIS.
</p>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<pb n="541"/><anchor id="Pg541"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>INDEX of the Unprinted Acts, &amp;c. Of the General
Assembly, 1690.</hi></head>

<p>
Election of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Hugh Kennedy</hi> to be Moderator.
Sess. 1.
</p>

<p>
Continuation of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Spalding</hi>, Clerk to the late
General Meeting, to be Clerk to this Assembly for
the time. <hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Committee for Revising the Commissions of the Members
of this Assembly, <hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Committee for Overture, References, and Appeals,
Sess. 2.
</p>

<p>
Committee For Synod-Books, and for Bills. <hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Committee for Supplying the Kirks of <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, during
this Assembly. <hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Reference anent the Purging and Planting of the City
and Presbytery of <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, to the Commission to
be appointed for Visitations, Sess. 5.
</p>

<p>
Declaration by the Moderator, that this Assembly
would Despose no Incumbents, simply for their Judgment,
anent the Government of the Church, nor
urge Re-ordination upon them, Sess. 6.
</p>

<p>
The Opinion of the Assembly, declining to send any
Ministers to <hi rend='italic'>Northumberland</hi>, upon a  Petition of
some in that Country, is respect these People do not
belong to this Church. Sess. 8.
</p>

<p>
Act discharging Mr. Andrew <hi rend='italic'>Sliry</hi> the exercise of the
Ministry, at <hi rend='italic'>Falkirk</hi>, and appointing the Presbytery
of <hi rend='italic'>Linlithgow</hi> to declare the said Kirk Vacant: As also
discharging him the exercise of the Ministry, within
the bounds of that Presbytery, without the said
Presbyteries allowances. Sess. 9.
</p>

<pb n="542"/><anchor id="Pg542"/>

<p>
Act anent the call given to Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Robert Anderson</hi>
by the Parish of <hi rend='italic'>Leuquhars. Ibid.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Act declaring Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Arthur Mitchell</hi> Rightful
Minister at <hi rend='italic'>Turreff</hi> Sess. 10.
</p>

<p>
Act Transporting Mr. <hi rend='italic'>George Campbel</hi>, to the
Profession of Divinity in the Colledge of <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>,
and to the Ministrie in that City. Sess. 11.
</p>

<p>
Act appointing some Ministers to Repair to <hi rend='italic'>Dundie</hi>, Sess. 12.
</p>

<p>
Act transporting Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Gabriel Semple</hi> to
<hi rend='italic'>Jedburgh. Ibid.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Act anent Letters to several Ministers and Preachers Now
abroad, belonging to this Church, for their Returning Home. Sess. 13.
</p>

<p>
Act Reviving the Overtures of the Assembly. 1649.
Sess. 2. Anent the ordering of the Assembly House <hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Act against Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Mckenzie</hi>, declaring
the Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Karklistoun</hi> Vacant, with
a Recommendation to the Presbytery of <hi rend='italic'>Linlithgow</hi>,
to see the same planted. <hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Overture anent planting of the North. Sess. 14.
</p>

<p>
Act appointing some Ministers to repair to <hi rend='italic'>Angus</hi>,
with a Recommendation to the privy Council thereanent. <hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Continuation of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Spalding</hi>, to be
Clerk of this Assembly, till further Consideration. Sess. 15.
</p>

<p>
Act against Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Park</hi> late Incumbent
at <hi rend='italic'>Carriden</hi>, finding that he had fallen from
his appeal, from the Presbytery of <hi rend='italic'>Linlithgow</hi>,
by his non compeatance <hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Election of <hi rend='italic'>John Blair</hi> to be Agent for this Church. Sess. 16.
</p>

<pb n="543"/><anchor id="Pg543"/>

<p>
Remit Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Alexander Heriot</hi> at <hi rend='italic'>Dalkeith</hi>
to the Synod of <hi rend='italic'>Loathian</hi>.
Sess. 17.
</p>

<p>
Act Ratifiying the Sentence of deposition, past by the Presbytery
of <hi rend='italic'>Stirling</hi> against Mr. <hi rend='italic'>James Forsyth</hi>
Elder late Incumbent
at <hi rend='italic'>St. Ninians</hi>, for Celebrating an Incestuous Marriage.
Sess. 18.
</p>

<p>
Act in favours of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>James Couper</hi> Incumbent at
<hi rend='italic'>Humbie</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Recommendation to the Commission of Parliament for Plantation
of Kirks &amp;c. in favours of the Synod of <hi rend='italic'>Argyl</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Reference to the Commission to be appointed for Visitations on
the South side of <hi rend='italic'>Tay</hi>, in favours of the
Town of <hi rend='italic'>Perth</hi>, with
an Approbation of the Presbytries procedure, in constituting
a Kirk Session there. <hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Recommendation to the Commission of Parliament for Plantation
of Kirks. &amp;c. In Favours of the Town of <hi rend='italic'>Drumfries</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Election of <hi rend='italic'>George Mosman</hi> to be Printer to the Assemly, Sess. 21.
</p>

<p>
Recommendation to his Majesty, the Parliament, and Commission
for plantation of Kirks &amp;c. in favours, of the Laird and
Lady <hi rend='italic'>Hoptoun</hi> for Erecting the Lead Mynes
in a Parish. <hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Recommendation to the Presbytery of <hi rend='italic'>Dambarten</hi> and Synod
of <hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi>, in favours of Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>Thomas Mitchell</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Recommendation to the Commission for plantation of Kirks &amp;c
For Re-erecting the Kirk and Parish of <hi rend='italic'>New-Cumnock</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Reference in favours of the Burgh and Parish of <hi rend='italic'>Stanrawer</hi>, and
the Parishes of <hi rend='italic'>Anwith</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Borgh</hi>,
to the several Presbyteries, for applying to the Meetings in
<hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi>, to louse the <hi rend='italic'>Irish</hi> Ministers
now serving in these Parishes to the end they may
continue their setled Ministers. Sess. 22.
</p>

<p>
Reference to the Presbytery of <hi rend='italic'>Hamiltoun</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Lanerk</hi>, in Favours
of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Samuel Mowat</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Recommendation to the Commission for plantation of Kirks &amp;c.
For Re-erecting the Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Robertoun</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Act Impowering the Ministers and Elders in the North who are
to joyn with the Visitation for that Countrey, to take Informations,
and to cause Cite Parties and witnesses against the
first Diet of the said Visitation. Sess. 24
</p>

<p>
Remit Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Forsyth</hi> Younger to the Presbytery
of <hi rend='italic'>Stirling</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>
</p>

<p>
The Opinion of the Assembly declining to meddle in the Petition
<pb n="544"/><anchor id="Pg544"/>
of the Lord and Lady <hi rend='italic'>Crichtoun</hi>, as being a
matter Civil, and so not comepetent to the Assembly. <hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Reference in Favours of the Parish of <hi rend='italic'>Genluce</hi> to
the Presbytery of the bounds, to apply for lousing some
<hi rend='italic'>Irish</hi> Ministers, as in the case of the
Burgh of <hi rend='italic'>Stranrawer.</hi>, &amp;c. Ibid.
</p>

<p>
The Opinion of the Assembly declining to meddle in a Petition of the
Heretors of <hi rend='italic'>Collingtoun</hi>, as being a matter Civil
and Incompetent to them. Sess. 25.
</p>

<p>
Recommendation in Favours of <hi rend='italic'>George Mosman</hi>
anent some Books. <hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Act appointing Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Gilbert Rule</hi>, to Writt an
answer to some Pamphlets. <hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Act for supplying the Charges of Ministers appointed for Visitations
in the North. <hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Act appointing some Ministers to Repair to the bounds of the
Presbyteries of <hi rend='italic'>Lochmahan Middlebee, &amp;c.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Act declaring the Sentence of Deposition and Excommunication past
by the late pretended Bishop of <hi rend='italic'>Dumblane</hi>,
against Mr. <hi rend='italic'>William Spence</hi> to be void and Null.
<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Letter from the Assembly to the Earle of <hi rend='italic'>Melvill</hi>
Lord <hi rend='italic'>Secretary</hi> of State for
<hi rend='italic'>Scotland.</hi> Sess. 26.
</p>

<p>
Act appointing some Ministers and Probationers to Repair to the
North. <hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Act appointing some Ministers to the like effect with the former.
<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Committee for Revising the Acts of Assembly. <hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Recommendation to the privy Council, for some Charity to Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>William Cameron</hi> one of the late Conformists,
<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Recommendation to the Presbytery of
<hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, and the Synod of
<hi rend='italic'>Louthian</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Fife</hi>,
in Favours of <hi rend='italic'>Mary Aresyne.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Act appointing the Synod Books to be sent in to the next General
Assembly. <hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>
</p>

<p>
FINIS.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="545"/><anchor id="Pg545"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>An INDEX Of the Principal unprinted Acts of the Assembly
at <hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi>, 1638.</head>

<p>
Act containing sundry protestations between the Commissioners
Grace and the members of the Assembly.
</p>

<p>
Act of Election of <hi rend='italic'>Mr. Alexander Henderson</hi> to be Moderatour.
</p>

<p>
Act of <hi rend='italic'>Mr. Archibald Johnstoun</hi> his admission to
be Clerk and his production of the Registers of the Kirk, which
were preserved by <hi rend='italic'>Gods</hi> wonderful providence.
</p>

<p>
An act disallowing any private conference and constant Assessours to the Moderatour.
</p>

<p>
The Act Registrating his Majesties will given in by his Commissioner.
</p>

<p>
The Act bearing the Assemblies Protestation against the dissolution thereof.
</p>

<p>
Act anent the Presbitery of <hi rend='italic'>Auchterardors</hi>
present seat at <hi rend='italic'>Aberuthven</hi> for a time.
</p>

<p>
Act anent the order of receiving the repentance of any penitent
<hi rend='italic'>Prelate</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Act anent the admission of <hi rend='italic'>Mr. Archibald Johnstoun</hi>
to be Advocate and <hi rend='italic'>Mr. Robert Dalgleish</hi> to be Agent
for the Kirk.
</p>

<p>
Act anent the transporting of <hi rend='italic'>Mr. Alexander Henderson</hi> from
<hi rend='italic'>Leuchars</hi> to <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Act containing a Commission to sit at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi> December, 26.
</p>

<p>
Another Commission to sit at <hi rend='italic'>Jedburgh</hi> Ian, 22.
</p>

<p>
Another Commission to sit at <hi rend='italic'>Irwin</hi> Ian, 15.
</p>

<p>
Another Commission to sit at <hi rend='italic'>Dunde</hi> Feb, 5.
</p>

<p>
Another Commission to sit at <hi rend='italic'>Chantrie</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Forres</hi>, March, 19.
</p>

<p>
Another Commission to sit at <hi rend='italic'>Kirkubright</hi>, Feb. 6.
</p>

<p>
A Commission for visitation of the Colledge of <hi rend='italic'>Aberdeen</hi>.
</p>

<p>
A Commission for visitation of the Colledge of <hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Act appointing the Commissioners to attend the Parliament, and the Articles which
they are to represent in name of the Kirk to the Estates.
</p>

<p>
Act ordaining the Presbyteries to intimate in their several Pulpites the
Assemblies explanation of Confession of Faith.
</p>

<p>
The Act against <hi rend='italic'>Episcopacy</hi>. The Act against the
<hi rend='italic'>Five Articles</hi>.
</p>

<p>
The act against the <hi rend='italic'>Service Book</hi>. The
<hi rend='italic'>Book of Cannons</hi>.
</p>

<p>
The <hi rend='italic'>Book of Ordination</hi>. The
<hi rend='italic'>High Commission</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Act of Excommunication and deposition against some <hi rend='italic'>Prelates</hi>,
and
<pb n="546"/><anchor id="Pg546"/>
of deposition only against some of them.
</p>

<p>
Act ordaining all Presbyteries to keep a solemn thanksgiving in all Parishes,
for <hi rend='italic'>Gods</hi> Blessing and good success to this Assembly,
upon the first convenient Sabbath.
</p>

<p>
Act warranding the <hi rend='italic'>Moderator</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Clerk</hi>
to give out summonds upon relevant complaints, against parties to compear
before the next Assembly.
</p>

<p>
Act that none be chosen as <hi rend='italic'>Ruling Elders</hi> to sit
in Presbyteries, Provincial, or General Assemblies, but those who
subscribes the Covenant as it is now declared, and acknowledges the
constitutions of this Assembly.
</p>

<p>
Act for representing to the Parliament the necessity of the
standing of the <hi rend='italic'>Procurators</hi> place for the Kirk.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Index of the Principal Acts of the Assembly at</hi>
Edinburgh, 1639, <hi rend='italic'>not Printed.</hi></head>

<p>
The Kings Majesties Commission to <hi rend='italic'>John</hi> Earle of
<hi rend='italic'>Traquair</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Election of Master <hi rend='italic'>David Dickson</hi> Moderator.
</p>

<p>
The Kings Majesties Commissioners, and the Assemblies Declarations anent
the Assembly of <hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Renounciation of Master <hi rend='italic'>Alexander Lindsay</hi> pretended
Bishop of <hi rend='italic'>Dunkeld</hi>, of Episcopacy.
</p>

<p>
Commission for visitation of the University of <hi rend='italic'>St. Andrews</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Commission for visitation of the University of <hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Act reviving former Acts against going of Salt-pans on the Sabbath day.
</p>

<p>
Act for drawing up of a Catechisme.
</p>

<p>
Articles and overtures to be presented to the ensuing Parliament.
</p>

<p>
The report of the Committee appointed for examination of the Book called
<hi rend='italic'>The Kings Manifesto</hi>, or <hi rend='italic'>Declaration</hi>.
</p>

<p>
The Covenant or Confession of Faith.
</p>

<p>
Act anent the adjoining of some Kirks in the Ile of <hi rend='italic'>Boes</hi>
to the Presbytery of <hi rend='italic'>Denune</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Act adjoyning some Kirks in the Iles of <hi rend='italic'>Coill</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Tyrie</hi>, to the Provincial of <hi rend='italic'>Kilmoire</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Commission for visitation of the Colledge of <hi rend='italic'>Aberdeen</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Commission to the Presbytery of <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Index of the Principal Acts of the Assembly at</hi>
Aberdene, 1640, <hi rend='italic'>not Printed.</hi></head>

<p>
Election of Master <hi rend='italic'>Andrew Ramsay</hi> Moderator.
</p>

<p>
Act against Prophaning of the Sabbath.
</p>

<p>
Act anent Charmers.
</p>

<p>
Act renewing of a former Act made against Priors and Abbots.
</p>

<pb n="547"/><anchor id="Pg547"/>

<p>
Commission for attending the Parliament.
</p>

<p>
Commission anent the Province of <hi rend='italic'>Ross</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Commission anent the Presbytery of <hi rend='italic'>Kirkwall.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Act anent the Presbytery-seat of <hi rend='italic'>Selkirk.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Report of the Visitors of the University of <hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi>,
and a new Commission of Visitation of that University.
</p>

<p>
Act anent the carriage of Ministers.
</p>

<p>
Act anent the ordering of Family exercise.
</p>

<p>
Act for Ruling Elders keeping of Presbyteries.
</p>

<p>
Act anent Magistrates being Members of Kirk Session.
</p>

<p>
Approbation of the proceedings of the Commissioners appointed to attend the
preceeding Parliament.
</p>

<p>
Act anent abolishing of Idolatrous Monuments.
</p>

<p>
Act anent abolishing of idolatrous monuments in and about
<hi rend='italic'>Aberdene</hi>.
</p>

<p>
The report of the Visitors of the University of <hi rend='italic'>Aberdene</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Commission for visiting the University of <hi rend='italic'>Aberdene</hi>.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Index of the Principal Acts of the Assembly
holden at</hi> St. Andrews, <hi rend='italic'>and</hi> Edinburgh 1641.
<hi rend='italic'>not Printed.</hi></head>

<p>
His Majesties Commission to <hi rend='italic'>John</hi> Earle of
<hi rend='italic'>Woems</hi>.
</p>

<p>
A Letter from the Parliament to the General Assembly.
</p>

<p>
Act anent the continuation of Master <hi rend='italic'>Andrew Ramsay</hi> Moderator.
</p>

<p>
His Majesties Letter to the Assembly.
</p>

<p>
Act anent the translation of the Assembly from <hi rend='italic'>St.
Andrews</hi> to <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Election of Master <hi rend='italic'>Alexander Henderson</hi> Moderator.
</p>

<p>
Declaration of the Assembly anent the translation thereof to
<hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Act for drawing up one Catechisme one Confession of Faith directory
of publick worship and form of Kirk-government.
</p>

<p>
Act anent Master <hi rend='italic'>Andrew Ramsay's</hi> delivery to
the Clerk the Books, <hi rend='italic'>Warnesius</hi> Book, and
others which he received at <hi rend='italic'>Aberdene</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Overtures anent transportation of Ministers, and plantation of Schooles,
recommended to be advised by Synods.
</p>

<p>
Reference to the Parliament anent the Kirks of <hi rend='italic'>Dunkeld</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Act anent Master <hi rend='italic'>David Calderwood</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Commission anent erecting of a Presbytery in <hi rend='italic'>Biggar</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Commission for visitation of <hi rend='italic'>Orknay</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Zetland</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Act anent bringing of the Synod books to the Assemblies.
</p>

<p>
Reference from the Parliament anent a Band and a Paper called a
<hi rend='italic'>Manifesto</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Act anent the deleting of the Earle of <hi rend='italic'>Traquairs</hi>
Declaration out of the Books of secret Councel.
</p>

<p>
Report of Overtures made anent the Plantation of Kirks in the
<hi rend='italic'>High-lands</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Commission for visitation of the University of <hi rend='italic'>St. Andrews</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Commission for visitation of the University of <hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Commission to attend the Parliament.
</p>

<p>
Reference to that Commission anent the Presbytery of <hi rend='italic'>Sky</hi>.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="548"/><anchor id="Pg548"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Index of the Principal Acts of the Assembly
holden at</hi> St. Andrews, 27. <hi rend='italic'>July</hi>, 1642.
<hi rend='italic'>not Printed.</hi></head>

<p>
His Majesties Commission granted to <hi rend='italic'>Charles Earle</hi> of
<hi rend='italic'>Dumfermling</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Election of Master <hi rend='italic'>Robert Douglas</hi> Moderator.
</p>

<p>
Acceptation of the Commission from the <hi rend='italic'>Scottish</hi>
Kirk at <hi rend='italic'>Camphire</hi>, granted to Master <hi rend='italic'>William
Spong</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Act renewing the Commissions for Visitation of the Universities of
<hi rend='italic'>St. Andrews,</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Act anent delivery of the <hi rend='italic'>Irish</hi> contribution
to the receivers appointed by the secret Council.
</p>

<p>
Act anent Idolatrous monuments in <hi rend='italic'>Ruthwill</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Act anent the Books of the Presbyteries in our Army that went to
<hi rend='italic'>England</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Act anent the planting of the Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Kilwinning</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Commission anent the erecting of a Presbytery in <hi rend='italic'>Biggar</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Act repealing the Act of the Synod of <hi rend='italic'>Galloway</hi>
concerning the tryal of Actual Ministers.
</p>

<p>
The Kings Declaration anent the gift of 500. Lib.
</p>

<p>
Act for sending of Expectants to <hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi>,
and for a Commission to be drawn up to some Ministers to go there.
</p>

<p>
Recommendation to the Marques of <hi rend='italic'>Argyle</hi> anent
<hi rend='italic'>Patrick Egertie</hi> Priest, and all other Priests,
or sayers of Masse in the North Iles, or within the bounds of his Justiciarie.
</p>

<p>
Act anent the reponing of Master <hi rend='italic'>Gilbert Power</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Act for putting the Overtures anent maintaining of Bursars in every
Presbytery in practice.
</p>

<p>
Report of the Commission for revising of some Synod Books, and
the Assemblies approbation.
</p>

<p>
Act forgiving transumpts of the Covenant and Band.
</p>

<p>
Act for sending of General Acts of Assemblies to Synods.
</p>

<p>
Act anent <hi rend='italic'>James Murray</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Report of the Committee of reports of the proceedings of the Commissioners
of the last Assembly appointed to attend the Parliament, with certain
overtures of the Assemblies approbation thereof, with the double of
the Signator of 500 lib sent to his Majesty.
</p>

<p>
Commission for visitation or <hi rend='italic'>Orknay</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Zetand.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Reference to the Commission of this Assembly, anent the choice of
any Minister to go to <hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi>, in place of
any of the six appointed by this Assembly to that effect, in case
they or any of them be impeded by sickness or death.
</p>

<p>
Recommendation of the <hi rend='italic'>Iles, Anandail, Esadail, Liddedail,</hi>
&amp;c for want of Kirks and Schooles; of the Presbyteries of
<hi rend='italic'>Lochmaben</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>Nowhie</hi>, for want
of a Civil Magistrate, to the Commission for Plantation of Kirks, and
secret Councill, <hi rend='italic'>Respectivè</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Reference to the Commission of this Assembly for planting of the
Kirks of <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Act anent Master <hi rend='italic'>Colvils</hi> invitation to St.
<hi rend='italic'>Andrews</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Commission anent the planting of the Landwart Kirks of <hi rend='italic'>St.
Andrews</hi>.
</p>

<p>
References and Overtures, and the Assemblies answer thereto.
</p>

<p>
Reference to the Commission of
<pb n="549"/><anchor id="Pg549"/>
this Assembly anent Master <hi rend='italic'>James Fairlie</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Reference to the commission of this Assembly anent the planting of the Kirk of Dundie.
</p>

<p>
Overtures anent the <hi rend='italic'>Kirk of Camphire</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Recommendation to the Magistrates of <hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi> anent
mundays market.
</p>

<p>
Act anent giving in to the Clerk the list of Expectants.
</p>

<p>
Act giving power and liberty to Sir. <hi rend='italic'>Archibald Johnstoun</hi>
Procurator for the Kirk, and Clerk to the General Assembly, to adjoyne
any to himself, or to depute in these Offices whom he shall think fit.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Index of the Acts of the Assembly holden at</hi>
Edinburgh, 1643, <hi rend='italic'>not Printed.</hi></head>

<p>
The Kings Majesties Commission to Sir. <hi rend='italic'>Thomas Hope</hi>
of Craighall Knight, His Majesties Advocate.
</p>

<p>
Election of Master <hi rend='italic'>Alexander Henderson</hi>, Moderatour.
</p>

<p>
Appointment of Master <hi rend='italic'>John Scot</hi>, who was sent from
the Presbyterie in the Scottish Army in <hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi>,
to be present in the Assembly every session.
</p>

<p>
Questions propounded by the moderatour, to some brethren in the North,
anent some Papists there, and their answers thereunto.
</p>

<p>
Commission for visitation of the University of St. <hi rend='italic'>Andrews</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Letters from Master <hi rend='italic'>William Spang</hi>, Minister of
the Scot's Kirk at <hi rend='italic'>Camphire</hi>, with attestations
of some Dutch Kirks, anent hanging of Pensils in Kirks, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
Act for Summar Excommunication of <hi rend='italic'>Adam Abercrombie</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Approbation of the deposition of Master <hi rend='italic'>John Forbes</hi>,
With an ordinance for his Subscribing the Covenant.
</p>

<p>
Questions from the Presbytery of <hi rend='italic'>Hadingtoun</hi>, with
the Assemblies resolution thereof, anent Sir <hi rend='italic'>John Seatan</hi>,
and his Daughter.
</p>

<p>
Approbation of the advice of the Commissioners of the late Assembly at
St. <hi rend='italic'>Andrews</hi>, for not Printing two Acts of the
last Assembly held at <hi rend='italic'>Aberdene</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Approbation of the Lord <hi rend='italic'>Maitland</hi> his Faithful
discharging the Commission given to him by the late Assembly at St.
<hi rend='italic'>Andrews</hi> for repairing to the Kings Majesty
and Parliament of England, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
Committee appointed to meet with the English Commissioners.
</p>

<p>
Power of Collectory to Master Robert <hi rend='italic'>Dalgliesh</hi>,
of the annuity of 500. lib, Sterling granted by his Majesty to the Kirk.
</p>

<p>
Approbation of the Lord Marquesse of <hi rend='italic'>Argyle</hi>
his apprehending <hi rend='italic'>Ronald Mackronald</hi> Priest.
</p>

<p>
Approbation of the Laird of <hi rend='italic'>Birtenboge</hi>, for
apprehending <hi rend='italic'>John Robeson</hi> Priest.
</p>

<p>
Renounciation of the unlawful Band, conforme to the ordinance of the
Assembly at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, 1641.
</p>

<p>
Recommendation anent the captives in Argiers.
</p>

<p>
Approbation of Master Alexander Henderson his Faithful and wise
carriage in discharging of the Commissions given to him by
<pb n="550"/><anchor id="Pg550"/>
the Commissioners of the late Assembly, forgoing to his Majestie, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
Report of the Committee appointed to meet with the English Commissioners.
</p>

<p>
Report of the Committee appointed for trying the Presbytery of
<hi rend='italic'>Auchterarder</hi>, the Assemblies approbation, admonition and publick
rebuke of the several brethren of that Presbytery <hi rend='italic'>respectivè</hi>
according to their behaviours. An Suspension of Master <hi rend='italic'>John
Graham</hi>, With the ordinance for debarring the Ministers who are Commissioners
of that Presbyterie from this Assembly.
</p>

<p>
Recommendation to the Synod of <hi rend='italic'>Perth</hi> for reconciling the
differences amongst the brethren of that Presbytery.
</p>

<p>
Publick rebuke of Master <hi rend='italic'>Henry Futhie</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Recommendation of the desire of <hi rend='italic'>Sir John Crawford</hi> of
<hi rend='italic'>Kilburnie</hi> Knight, to the Presbytery of
<hi rend='italic'>Dumbartan</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Anent Doctour <hi rend='italic'>Howies</hi> papers.
</p>

<p>
Act anent the desire of the Letters sent from the Minister of the Scottish Kirk
at <hi rend='italic'>Camphire</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Recommendation to him, to urge the subscribing of the Covenant.
</p>

<p>
Deposition of Master <hi rend='italic'>Andrew Logie</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Erection of a presbytery at <hi rend='italic'>Biggar</hi>, with a suspension
of entry thereunto.
</p>

<p>
Reference of the matter betwixt the Parishoners of <hi rend='italic'>Closburn</hi>
&amp;c. and the Presbyterie of <hi rend='italic'>Penpont</hi>, to the Synod of
<hi rend='italic'>Drumfreis</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Reference of the Petition of <hi rend='italic'>Dunscoir</hi> to the Commiss.
Parl. for Plantation of Kirks.
</p>

<p>
Recommendation anent the Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Carwhit</hi>, to the Presbytery
of St. <hi rend='italic'>Andrews</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Remitt. anent <hi rend='italic'>Trastat</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Drungey</hi>,
to the Synod of <hi rend='italic'>Drumfriess</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Act anent <hi rend='italic'>Roger Lindsay</hi> of <hi rend='italic'>Maine</hi>
his Excommunication, with a Recommendation to the Convention of Estates Concerning him.
</p>

<p>
Recommendation to the Convention of Estates, anent Persons Excommunicate.
</p>

<p>
Commission for visitation of <hi rend='italic'>Orkney, Zetland</hi>, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
Act anent the Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Stracathro</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Recommendation anent Erecting a Kirk at <hi rend='italic'>Seatoun</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Reference to the Commission to be appointed by this Assembly, for the publick
affairs of this Kirk, for providing the University of <hi rend='italic'>Aberdene</hi>
with a Professour of Divinity.
</p>

<p>
Reference to the said Commiss. for providing a Professour of Divinity to the
University of St. <hi rend='italic'>Andrews</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Committee appointed to conferre with the English Commissioners upon the papers
presented by them to the Assembly upon the 15. of <hi rend='italic'>August</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Committee to conferre also with the Committee of the Convention of Estates thereanent.
</p>

<p>
Ordinance that Master <hi rend='italic'>Alexander Henderson</hi>, Master
<hi rend='italic'>David Calderwood</hi>, and Master <hi rend='italic'>David Dickson</hi>,
make some draught and forme of the Publick Directory for Worship.
</p>

<p>
Act for proceeding with Ecclesiastick Censures against the Murtherers
of <hi rend='italic'>William Crichtoun</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Commission appointed to sit at <hi rend='italic'>Air</hi> for the
particulars concerning the Parochiners of <hi rend='italic'>Stainiskirk</hi>, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
Tryal of the Synod Books.
</p>

<p>
Approbation of the Act of the last Assembly, concerning the power granted to
Sir <hi rend='italic'>Archibald Johnstoun</hi>, Procurator for the Kirk, and Clerk
to the Assembly.
</p>

<pb n="551"/><anchor id="Pg551"/>

<p>
Recommendation of the matter concerning a Collegue to the Minister of
<hi rend='italic'>Drumfries</hi>, to the Commissioners of Parliament for Plantation
of Kirks.
</p>

<p>
Recommendation to the Synod of <hi rend='italic'>Lewishsam</hi> to try the
proceedings of the Presbytery of <hi rend='italic'>Peebles</hi>, in admission of
Master <hi rend='italic'>John Hay</hi> to the Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Peebles</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Reference of Master <hi rend='italic'>John Mackeinzie</hi> to the Commission of the
General Assembly.
</p>

<p>
Act for proceeding against the Presbytery of <hi rend='italic'>Sky</hi>, for not
keeping the Synod.
</p>

<p>
Recommendation to the Lord Marquess of <hi rend='italic'>Argyle</hi>, to move the ruling
Elders in <hi rend='italic'>Argyle</hi>, to be more observant of Presbyteries and Synods.
</p>

<p>
Recommendation to the Lord Marquesse <hi rend='italic'>Argyle</hi> for planting
<hi rend='italic'>Loquhaber</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Ordinance for supressing of <hi rend='italic'>Sub-Synods</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Ordinance for deleting an Act of the Synod of <hi rend='italic'>Murray</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Reference anent the order of Tryal of Synods, Presbyteries, and Kirks, with a
recommendation for using the orders set down in the Assemblies 1638. and 1602. in
the <hi rend='italic'>interim</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Commission for planting the Kirks of <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Remit to the Presbytery of St. <hi rend='italic'>Andrews</hi>, anent the Kirk
of <hi rend='italic'>Largo</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Recommendation of Master <hi rend='italic'>James Fairlie</hi>, to the Commission
of this Assembly.
</p>

<p>
Recommendation anent the Bill given in by <hi rend='italic'>William Janson</hi>
Printer in <hi rend='italic'>Amsterdam</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Reference anent Master <hi rend='italic'>Robert Fleming</hi> to the Commission appointed
to sit at <hi rend='italic'>Air</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Report and approbation of the proceedings of the Commission of visitation for the
University of <hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Commission for Visitation of that Universitie.
</p>

<p>
Report of the Committee anent the distressed People in <hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Recommendation to the Commissioners of the General Assembly, to sit at
<hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi> anent Expectants to go to <hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Acts anent <hi rend='italic'>James Murray</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Recommendation of <hi rend='italic'>Master Robert Brown</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Commission to the Presbytery of <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, for his admission
to the Earle of <hi rend='italic'>Irwines</hi> Regiment.
</p>

<p>
Report of the Committee anent the receiving and dispensing of his receipts of the
annuitie of five hundred pounds sterling, &amp;c. And approbation thereof.
</p>

<p>
Report of the Committee appointed to consider the References from the Commission of
the late Assembly.
</p>

<p>
Act for <hi rend='italic'>Master Andrew Murray</hi>, Minister at
<hi rend='italic'>Ebdie</hi>, his exercise of his calling of the Ministerie, and
for rejecting honours, &amp;c. Incompatible with that calling.
</p>

<p>
Recommendation of <hi rend='italic'>Master William Bennet</hi> Minister at
<hi rend='italic'>Ancrum</hi>, to abstain from civil Courts and Meetings, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
Recommendation to the Commissioners of the Assembly for tryal if any Excommunicate
Papists be in the Scottish Regiments in <hi rend='italic'>France</hi>, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
Recommendation of <hi rend='italic'>Master James Johnstoun</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Reference of <hi rend='italic'>Tillifrusbie</hi> to the Presbyterie of
<hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Recommendation anent Laird <hi rend='italic'>Gagies</hi> mortification.
</p>

<p>
Recommendation of Master <hi rend='italic'>Alexander Trotter</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Recommendation anent the dismembering some parts of the Paroch of
<hi rend='italic'>Hadingtoun</hi>, to be a several Parochine.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="552"/><anchor id="Pg552"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Index of the Acts of the Assembly holden at</hi>
Edinburgh, 1644, <hi rend='italic'>not Printed.</hi></head>

<p>
Election of Master <hi rend='italic'>James Bonar</hi> Moderator.
<hi rend='italic'>Sess. I.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Continuation of the decision in the question concerning the Commission from
<hi rend='italic'>Crail</hi>, untill the appellation be discussed.
<hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Appointment of Committees for Bills, Reports, &amp;c, <hi rend='italic'>Sess. II.</hi>
</p>

<p>
A Letter from the Presbytery at the Armie concerning sending Ministers unto them.
<hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
A Letter from the Presbyterie in <hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
The Assemblies thankful resentment of the E. <hi rend='italic'>Louthians</hi>
sufferings, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
The desire of the Convention of Estates, to quicken the proceedings of the Assembly,
and the Assemblies Resolutions thereinto. <hi rend='italic'>Sess. III.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Reference to the Commission to be appointed by the Assembly, for presenting
Overtures, Acts, &amp;c. to the Parliament. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Renovation of the Act of the preceeding Assembly, for planting the new Colledge
of <hi rend='italic'>St. Andrews, Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Ref. of <hi rend='italic'>Denmures</hi> Bill.
</p>

<p>
Ref. of <hi rend='italic'>Aytouns</hi> Bill.
</p>

<p>
Committee to consider some Overtures concerning Universities and Schooles.
<hi rend='italic'>Sess. IV.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Commission granted to Mr. <hi rend='italic'>William Cockburn</hi>, &amp; Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>Hugh Mackel</hi> for the first 3. Moneths beginning the 1.
of Aug. next; to Mr. <hi rend='italic'>George Dick</hi>, and Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John
Dick</hi>, the next 3. Moneths, and to Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Livingstoun</hi>,
and Mrs. <hi rend='italic'>Thomas Wylie</hi> for the Last 3. Moneths, to repair to the
North of <hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi>, bearing the same power granted to the
Persons appointed for that imployment by the preceeding Assembly.
<hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Renovation of the Commission for sending Expectants to <hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Recom. of Sir <hi rend='italic'>John Weemes</hi> of <hi rend='italic'>Bagie</hi>,
his Bill. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Commission for visitation of <hi rend='italic'>Orkney, Zetland, Caithness,
Sutherland</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Rosse</hi>, to Masters
<hi rend='italic'>William Falconer</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>Murdo Mackeinzie</hi>,
and <hi rend='italic'>Alexander Brodie</hi> of that Ilk.
</p>

<p>
Act for, M. <hi rend='italic'>George Halyburtouns</hi> going to the Army.
<hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Report of the Lords of Exchequer their promise concerning payment of some of the
arrears of the Annuitie of 500. <hi rend='italic'>Lib. Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Act and Reference concerning Mr. <hi rend='italic'>James Wood, Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Reference to the Commission of this Assembly concerning the Papers presented by my
Lord <hi rend='italic'>Waristoun</hi>, which were directed to the Commissioners of
the proceeding Assembly, <hi rend='italic'>Sess. V.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Ref. to the Commission for planting the New Colledge of
<hi rend='italic'>Aberdeen. Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Transportation of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>George Leslie</hi> to the Kirk of
<hi rend='italic'>Leslie. Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Act concerning the planting of the Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Syres, Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Ref. of the Countess of <hi rend='italic'>Kinnowles</hi> Bill to the
Commission. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Act concerning Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Andrew Murray</hi> Minister at
<hi rend='italic'>Ebdie, Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Act and Ref. concerning the planting of the Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Lamingtoun. Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Ref. to the Commission of the Assembly concerning Overtures for Universities and
Schooles, &amp;c. <hi rend='italic'>Sess. VI.</hi>
</p>

<pb n="553"/><anchor id="Pg553"/>

<p>
Ref. to the said Commission for planting the Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Aberdeen</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Indiction of a Fast, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Renovation of the appointment of the preceeding Assembly for framing a Directory
for Worship, and for Tryal of Synods, Presbyteries, and Kirks, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Act for the Clerks subscribing the deliverance of the Committee of Bills for Charity
to the distressed People of <hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Ref. to the Commission for considering the formes and draughts of Commissions for
Visitation of Universities. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Act recalling two Acts of Commission for Visitation of the University of S.
<hi rend='italic'>Andrews</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Recom. to the said Commission concerning confirmation of Ministers Books in their Wives
Testaments. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Recom. to the said Commission concerning Witches and Charmers. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Ref. of the Overtures of the Synod of <hi rend='italic'>Murray</hi> to the said
Commission. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Recom. of D. <hi rend='italic'>Adam Stuart</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Renovation of the Act concerning <hi rend='italic'>James Murray</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>Sess. ult.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Continuation of the Commission of the preceeding Assembly appointed to sit at
<hi rend='italic'>Air</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Act concerning Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Robert Peirson</hi> Minister in
<hi rend='italic'>Orkney</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Recom. of the Lord <hi rend='italic'>Gasks</hi> Bill. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Act concerning the Kirks of <hi rend='italic'>Aberchirdour</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Ennerkethenne</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Ref of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Alex. Petries</hi> Letter to the Commission of
Assembly. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Act concerning the reposition of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Maxwel</hi> sometime
Minister at <hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi>, with an Ordinance for his subscribing
a particular Declaration of the unlawfulness of Episcopacy. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Ref. of my Lord <hi rend='italic'>Seatons</hi> Bill to the Commission of Assembly.
<hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Letter from the Presbytery at the Army, with a Reference to the Commission concerning
the restraint of transporting Women to the Army.  <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Ref. to the Commission of Assembly concerning the Letters from the Commissioners at
<hi rend='italic'>London</hi>, &amp;c. and concerning the Paraphrase of the Psalmes
in Meeter. <hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Ref. of my Lord <hi rend='italic'>Tester's</hi> Bill to the said Commission.
<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Act concerning Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Alexander Trotter</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Ref. of <hi rend='italic'>Margaret Thomsons</hi> Bill to the Commission of
Assembly. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Remit. of the Presbytery of <hi rend='italic'>Achterardour</hi> concerning the matter of
Mr. <hi rend='italic'>William Cook</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Transplantation of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>William Rait</hi> to
<hi rend='italic'>Brachen</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Ordinance for the Ministers of the Presbytery of <hi rend='italic'>Peebles</hi> their
acknowledgment of their disobedience to the Acts both of the General and Provincial
Assemblies, in admitting Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Hay</hi>, upon their knees before
the Provincial of <hi rend='italic'>Louthian</hi>; And approbation of the Dissenters;
with Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Hayes</hi> Declaration, and the Assemblies Ordinance
for his subscribing a particular Declaration, concerning the unlawfulness of
Episcopacy, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Ref. concerning the Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Lesmahago</hi> to their Provincial.
<hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Ratification of the Contract betwixt <hi rend='italic'>James Maxwel</hi> of
<hi rend='italic'>Imnorweeke</hi>, and Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Macghie</hi>,
concerning the augmentation of the Ministers Provision at
<hi rend='italic'>Dirletoun</hi>, and of the Acts of Presbytery and Synod
thereanent. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Ref. from the Presbytery of <hi rend='italic'>Hadingtoun</hi>, and the
Assemblies Answers, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Act for the Presbytery of <hi rend='italic'>Ersiltoune</hi> furnishing of Ministers
to the Master of <hi rend='italic'>Cranstons</hi> Regiment, and
<pb n="554"/><anchor id="Pg554"/>
for sending forth presently Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Thomas Donaldson</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Act for the Presb. of <hi rend='italic'>Dalkeith</hi> sending a Minister to La.
<hi rend='italic'>Nidires</hi> Regiment. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Ref. to the Commission of Assembly of the desires and Overtures of
<hi rend='italic'>Caithnes</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
<!-- poem -->
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>INDEX of the ACTS of this Assembly
holden at</hi> Edinburgh 1645. <hi rend='italic'>not Printed</hi>.</head>

<p>
The Remonstrance sent to the Kings Majesty from the Commissioners of the preceding
Assembly, concerning the Dyet and occasion of the meeting of this Assembly.
</p>

<p>
Election of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Robert Douglas</hi> Moderator.
<hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Report of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Robert Baillie</hi>, and Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>Geo. Gillespie</hi>, of the progress of the Treaty for
Uniformity, <hi rend='italic'>Sess. 2.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Appointment of Committees for the Directory, and for Bills, Appeals, &amp;c.
<hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Ref. of the Petitions from <hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi> to the Committee of
Bills, <hi rend='italic'>Sess. 3</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Letter to Mr. <hi rend='italic'>James Martin</hi> for intimating the
Deposition of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>William Barclay</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Acts appointing Mr. <hi rend='italic'>James Nasmith</hi> to attend the Lord
<hi rend='italic'>Montgomeries</hi> Regiment; Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Arthur Granger</hi>,
Lieutenant General <hi rend='italic'>Baillie</hi> his Regiment; and Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>Thomas Wilkie</hi> to the Earl of <hi rend='italic'>Lothians</hi>
Regiment. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Ref. of the Lord General's Letter to the Presbytery of
<hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Ref. of the Petition of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>James Hamilton's</hi> Wife to
the Committee for the Directory. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Recommendation to the Parliament for Ministers losses, <hi rend='italic'>Sess. 4</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Committee concerning Bursars, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Committee to confer with the lord <hi rend='italic'>Ogilvie</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Sess. 5</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Act ordaining the Presbytery of <hi rend='italic'>Hamiltoun</hi> to proceed against
Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Rae</hi> for refusing the Covenant. With an Ordinance for
giving in to the Clerk the report of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Hamiltouns</hi>
subscribing the Covenant, and of the Excommunication of <hi rend='italic'>D.
Hamiltoun</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Act discharging the relaxation of <hi rend='italic'>Nash Gordoun</hi>, with
a reference concerning the same to the Commissioners of this Assembly.
<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Committee for examining the witnesses against Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John
Robertson</hi>, and Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Fife</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
The Solemne League and Covenant of the three Kingdoms, (which is not here printed,
because already printed by Ordinance of the Commission of Assembly 1643. and
universally subscribed) with an Approbation of the Ordinances, and the diligence of the
Commissioners of Assembly for receiving thereof, &amp;c. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Committee concerning Col. <hi rend='italic'>Arcskines</hi> Regiment.
<hi rend='italic'>Sess. 6.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Committee appointed to speak with Col. <hi rend='italic'>Munro</hi>, concerning
Letters sent from the Officers of the Army of <hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi>;
<hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Committee for examining witnesses against Mr. <hi rend='italic'>James Oliphant</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Invitation of all who had scruples
<pb n="555"/><anchor id="Pg555"/>
concerning the Directory, to address themselves to that Committee, with a reference to
the said Committee concerning uniformity of practice of the Directory in this Kirk.
<hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Committee to conferre with the young Laird of <hi rend='italic'>Drum</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Appointment of <hi rend='italic'>Mr. Hugh Henderson</hi> to Col.
<hi rend='italic'>Stuarts</hi> Regiment. <hi rend='italic'>Sess. 7.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Committee for hearing Mr. <hi rend='italic'>James Wood</hi>, and the Commissioners
from S. <hi rend='italic'>Andrews</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Aberdene</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Recommendation of <hi rend='italic'>Barbara Meins</hi> Petition to the Parliament.
<hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Recommendation to the Parliament concerning the Army in <hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Invitation again of all that had scruples or doubts concerning the Directory,
to address themselves to the Committee for resolution. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Recommendation to the Parliament of the Petition of the Hospital of
<hi rend='italic'>Leith</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Sess. 8</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Recommendation to the Parliament of the Petition of the Kirk
<hi rend='italic'>Drummen</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Refer. of the Petition from the Northwest parts of <hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi>
to the Committee of Bills. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Recom. for a charitable supply to the people in and about
<hi rend='italic'>Borrowstounness</hi>, visited with the plague.
<hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Transportation of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>James Wood</hi> to S.
<hi rend='italic'>Andrews</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Commission for Masters <hi rend='italic'>Alexander Blair</hi> Minister at
<hi rend='italic'>Galstoun</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Robert Hamiltoun</hi> Minister at
<hi rend='italic'>Ballentrae</hi>, to go to <hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi> for the
first three Months, beginning the first day of <hi rend='italic'>July</hi>. Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>Samuel Row</hi> Minister at <hi rend='italic'>Kirkmabrek</hi>, Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>Alexander Levingstoun</hi> Minister at
<hi rend='italic'>Carmichael</hi> for the next three Months, beginning the first day of
<hi rend='italic'>October</hi>: and Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Henry Colwart</hi>
Minister at <hi rend='italic'>Pasley</hi>, and Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Henry Semple</hi>
Minister at <hi rend='italic'>Killcarne</hi>, beginning the first of
<hi rend='italic'>January</hi> next. <hi rend='italic'>Sess. 9.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Act for Ministers to the Earl of <hi rend='italic'>Lanericks</hi> Regiment of
Horse, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Sentence absolvitour of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>James Lichtoun</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Act for Ministers to the L. <hi rend='italic'>Balgonie</hi> and L.
<hi rend='italic'>Kirkcudbrights</hi> Regiments. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Committee for Colon. <hi rend='italic'>Arcskines</hi> Regiment.
</p>

<p>
Committee for conferring with the Laird of <hi rend='italic'>Drums</hi> second
Son, and their report. <hi rend='italic'>Sess. 10.</hi>
</p>

<p>
The Directory for publick Worship in the three Kingdoms. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Committee for presenting the Directory to the Parliament. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Act for planting the Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Tarbes</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Committee appointed to assist the Petition given into the Parliament, for trying
and executing some Witches. <hi rend='italic'>Sess. 11.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Committee appointed to visit young <hi rend='italic'>Drum</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Refer. to the Commission at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, for planting the Kirk
of <hi rend='italic'>Hamiltoun</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Exemption of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Alexander Balnaves</hi>, from going to
<hi rend='italic'>Kirkcudbrights</hi> Regiment. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Refer. to the Commission at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, for planting the Kirk
of <hi rend='italic'>Mauchline</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Committee appointed for considering the best means for planting the Kirk and new
Colledge of <hi rend='italic'>Aberdene</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
My Lord <hi rend='italic'>Angus</hi>, and the Laird of
<hi rend='italic'>Lammingtouns</hi> submission to the Assembly, with the Assemblies
determination, concerning the planting of the Kirk of
<hi rend='italic'>Lammingtoun</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Recom. of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Andrew Macghie</hi> to
<pb n="556"/><anchor id="Pg556"/>
the Presbytery of <hi rend='italic'>Hadingtoun. Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Recom. of Mr <hi rend='italic'>William Young</hi> to the Presbytery of
<hi rend='italic'>Glasgow; Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Recom. concerning the new Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Carfarne</hi> to the
Parliament. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Committee appointed to consider of the way for Printing Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>Rob. Boyd</hi> of <hi rend='italic'>Trochrigs</hi> Works.
<hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Ref. to the Commission at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, for revising the Labours
of a Brother, upon the continuation of the History of this Kirk, and thereafter to
cause Print them with consent of the Author. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Approbation of the Report, concerning the injuries done to Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>John Burne</hi> in <hi rend='italic'>London Derie</hi>, with a
Recom. thereof to the Parliament, and a Letter to the Commissioners at
<hi rend='italic'>London</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Sess. 12.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Two Acts concerning <hi rend='italic'>James Murray</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Appointment of the Commissioners of Presbyteries, to give in a list of the
Excommunicate persons within their bounds to the Clerk. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Committee for assisting the Petion. to the Parliament, for the necessities of
the Army in <hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Williamson</hi> to the Presbytery of St.
<hi rend='italic'>Andrews</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Tryal of the Books of the Synods of <hi rend='italic'>Lothian, Dumfreit, Glasgow,
Aberden</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>Ross</hi>, which were only produced. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Admission of the Excuses for non production of the Books of <hi rend='italic'>Fife,
Angus</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>Perth</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. of Sir <hi rend='italic'>James Hopes</hi> Petition to the Presbytery of
<hi rend='italic'>Lanrick</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. to the Parliament, concerning Suspensions against Ministers and Universities. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Thomas Boyd</hi> to the Presbytery of
<hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Bruce</hi> to the Parliament and Commission,
for Plantation of Kirks. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. of the Petition of the Synod of <hi rend='italic'>Galloway</hi> to the
Parliament, concerning <hi rend='italic'>Tho. Mackee</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. of the Petition of the Inhabitants of the <hi rend='italic'>Chanrie of
Ross</hi> to the Parliament, and to the Commission for planting of Kirks.
<hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Recom. of the Petition of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Archbald Maccorquodill</hi> Student
in S. <hi rend='italic'>Andrews</hi>, to D. <hi rend='italic'>Colvill</hi>
Professor of Divinity there. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. of the Petition of the Parochiners of <hi rend='italic'>Pasley</hi> to the
Commis. of Parl. for planting of Kirks. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Recom. of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Robert Torres</hi> to the Commission of Parliament, for
Plantation of Kirks. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. to the Parliament of the Petition of the Ministers upon the Borders, concerning
the insolence of Moss Troopers. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. of the <hi rend='italic'>Petition</hi> of the unprovided Ministers within the
Provinces of <hi rend='italic'>Aberdene, Murray</hi>, and
<hi rend='italic'>Ross</hi> to the Parliament, and Commission of Parliament for
plantation of Kirks. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. to the Parliament for changing the Fairs upon
<hi rend='italic'>Mondays</hi> to some other day. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. to the Presbytery of <hi rend='italic'>Lochmaben</hi>, for going on in
the process against Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Geo. Bryde</hi>. With a Recom. to
the E. <hi rend='italic'>Hartfell</hi>, to possess the Minister to the Kirk,
and concerning Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Thomas Chambers</hi> Gleib. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Two Letters from the Commissioners at <hi rend='italic'>London</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>Sess. 13.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Act authorizing Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Alexander Henderson</hi> to assist the
Commissioners of Parliament in the Treaty at <hi rend='italic'>Uxbridge</hi>, in
matters concerning Religion. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. of the Proposition concerning Excommunication to the Committee for the Directory. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. of the Propositions concerning
<pb n="557"/><anchor id="Pg557"/>
Government to the Committee for the Directory. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Deposition of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>George Halyburtoun</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Renovation of the Commission, for trying and censuring the Ryot at
<hi rend='italic'>Stanikirk</hi>, Sess. 14.
</p>

<p>
Renovation of the Commission, for visiting the University of St.
<hi rend='italic'>Andrews</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Renovation of the Commission, for visiting the University of
<hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Indiction of a Fast. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Committee for presenting the Petition to the Parliament. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act for a Minister to Preach to the Lord <hi rend='italic'>Uchiltrie</hi>
in the <hi rend='italic'>Blackness</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Ordinance for Mr. <hi rend='italic'>James Campbell</hi>, his attending
my Lord <hi rend='italic'>Coupers</hi> Regiment. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Invitation of any that had doubts concerning the Propositions of Government,
&amp;c. to come to the Committee for Resolution. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ordinance for Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Govans</hi> repairing to
my Lord <hi rend='italic'>Kircudbrights</hi> Regiment. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. to the Presbyteries of <hi rend='italic'>Linlithgow</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Stirling</hi>, for a voluntar Contribution of Clothes to the
Earl of <hi rend='italic'>Calenders</hi> Regiment. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act for admitting Mr. <hi rend='italic'>James Livingstoun</hi> Minister to the
Earl of <hi rend='italic'>Calenders</hi> Regiment. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ordinance for Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Hoomes</hi> attendance for the E.
<hi rend='italic'>Lanricks</hi> Regiment of Foot. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. to the Presbytery of <hi rend='italic'>Peebles</hi>, to consider Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>Robert Scots</hi> Bill, and to appoint another of their number
to <hi rend='italic'>Balgonies</hi> Regiment, in case his reasons be found good.
<hi rend='italic'>Sess. 15.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Ref. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Alexander Robertson</hi> to the Commission at
<hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act concerning the admission of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>David Houstoun</hi> to
the Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Tyrie</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Deposition of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Grahame</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. of the Petition concerning the Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Logie Montrose</hi>
to the Parliament, of their Commission for the plantation of Kirks. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>James Hamiltoun</hi> his relief to the
Parliament. <hi rend='italic'>Sess. 16.</hi>
</p>

<p>
The Propositions of Government and Ordination. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act concerning the Printing of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Robert Boyds</hi>
Commentar upon the <hi rend='italic'>Ephesians</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act discharging the Printing or Reprinting of the said Commentary, and of the
continuation of the History of the Kirk, and of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>David
Dicksons</hi> short Explication of the Apostolical Epistles, without the consent
of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Boyd</hi>, and of the Authors of the other
works <hi rend='italic'>respectivè</hi>. With a Recommendation to the Parliament
for their Authority to that effect. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Warrant for printing Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Robert Boyds</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Opuscula</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recommendation of the Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Calder</hi> to the Parliament. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recommendation of the Petition of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Alexander Trotter</hi> to
the Commission of Parliament for plantation of Kirks. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Reference to the Commission at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi> for petitioning
the Parliament, That Commissions may be granted for Visitation of Hospitals
in every Province. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recommendation to the Synod of <hi rend='italic'>Aberdene</hi>, to crave account of
the Laird of <hi rend='italic'>Drum</hi> his Bursers, and of any others
in that Province. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Sentence absolvitour of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>James Oliphant</hi>, with a rebuke
and admonition of the particulars proven. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recommendation of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Weirs</hi> Wifes Bill to the Parliament. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act giving Warrant to the Commissioners
<pb n="558"/><anchor id="Pg558"/>
at <hi rend='italic'>London</hi>, to agree to the clause
concerning Excommunication. Sess. 17.
</p>

<p>
Act concerning the Earl of <hi rend='italic'>Athols</hi> right
of presenting to the Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Blair</hi> in
<hi rend='italic'>Athol</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Reference of a Bigamist to the Justice, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act giving power to Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Stuart</hi> to preach
at the Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Dungorth</hi>, as an Expectant, while the
Presbytery or Synod sit. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recommendation to the Parliament concerning <hi rend='italic'>Thomas Mackie</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act for intimating Mr. <hi rend='italic'>George Halyburtouns Deposition</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act concerning the planting of the Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Aberdour</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Suspension of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Robertson</hi>. With a Reference to
the Commission at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi> for his farther tryal and censure. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Deposition of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Fyfe</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Samuel Rows</hi> petition to the Parliament. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Commission for visitation of the University of <hi rend='italic'>Aberdene</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act for changing the Presbytery seat of <hi rend='italic'>Aberdene</hi>, from the
old Town, to the new Town of <hi rend='italic'>Aberdene</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Recommen. and Reference to the Commission at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, for
planting the Kirk and Colledge Of <hi rend='italic'>Aberdene</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Reference of the petition given in by Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Thomas Mitchel</hi>, from
the Presbytery of <hi rend='italic'>Turreff</hi>, and the Viscount of
<hi rend='italic'>Frendraught</hi> for himself, and in the name of the
Parishoners of <hi rend='italic'>Aberchirdour</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Innerkething</hi>, to the Commission appointed for visitation of the
University of <hi rend='italic'>Aberdene</hi>. Sess. 18.
</p>

<p>
Ref. of the petition of the Commissioners of the presbytery of
<hi rend='italic'>Strabogie</hi> to the said Commission for visitation of
<hi rend='italic'>Aberdene</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. to the Parliament of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>George Wisharts</hi> Bill
for his maintenance, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. to the Commission at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, for planting the
Kirks of <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi> with three Ministers out of the
Province of <hi rend='italic'>Lothian</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. to the said Commission at <hi rend='italic'>Aberdene</hi>, for tryal and
censure of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>George Hannah</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ordinance for Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Alexander Moncreiffs</hi> repairing to my
Lord <hi rend='italic'>Balcarras</hi> Regiment. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Committee for presenting the Propositions of Government, and of the
solemn Warning, to the Parliament. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. of <hi rend='italic'>Isabel Peebles</hi> Bill to the Parliament, and
the Committee of losses. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. of <hi rend='italic'>Patrick Strauchan</hi> to the Presbytery
of <hi rend='italic'>Deere</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Deposition of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>James Row</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Declaration in favours of Ministers that cannot keep their houses
in thir times of troubles. Sess. 19.
</p>

<p>
Ref. to the Commission of the Kirk of the Lord <hi rend='italic'>Ogilvies</hi>
Bill, with a Reference to the Parliament of the latter part of it. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. of the Laird of <hi rend='italic'>Lamingtouns</hi> Bill to the Province of
<hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act concerning Col. <hi rend='italic'>Areskines</hi> Regiment. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recommendation of the petition of the Parishoners of <hi rend='italic'>Larbar</hi>,
to the Commission for plantation of Kirks, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Commission for visitation of the Hospitals of <hi rend='italic'>Perth</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Stirling</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recommendation of the education of the Lord <hi rend='italic'>Semples</hi> children
to the Earl of <hi rend='italic'>Eglingtoun</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ordinance to the Presbytery of <hi rend='italic'>Turress</hi>, for Excommunicating
Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Forbes</hi>, sometime Minister at
<hi rend='italic'>Auchinles</hi>, and of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>William Lowman</hi>,
sometime Minister at <hi rend='italic'>Cromartie</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>William Sibbald</hi> to the Presbytery of
<hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<pb n="559"/><anchor id="Pg559"/>

<p>
Ref. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Alexander Robertson</hi> to the Presbytery of
<hi rend='italic'>Kincardin</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. of the tryal and censure of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Cheyne</hi> to
the Commission for visitation of the University of <hi rend='italic'>Aberdene</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. of the Bill concerning the Theeves in the Borders to the Parliament. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Commission for visitation of the Hospitals, and mortified moneys, within the
Province of <hi rend='italic'>Aberdene</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Commission for visitation of the Hospitals within the Province of
<hi rend='italic'>Angus</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act in favours of the deposed Minister referred unto the Commission of the Assembly
at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recommendation to the Parliament for punishing the murther of Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>Patrick Lindsay</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recommendation to the Commission of the Assembly at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, to
present the Propositions of Government to the Parliament, and to receive their answer
thereunto. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recommendation to the said Commission to urge all means for Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>James Hamiltouns</hi> relief.
</p>

<p>
Letter to the Brethren of the Ministery in <hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Letter to Gen. Major <hi rend='italic'>Monro</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act appointing Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Hugh Kennedie</hi> for the first three moneths,
beginning the first of <hi rend='italic'>July</hi>, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Andrew
Lawder</hi> for the second three moneths, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>George Hutchisone</hi>
for the last three months to repair to <hi rend='italic'>London Derry</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Letter in favours of <hi rend='italic'>Margaret Thomson</hi> to the Presbytery
of <hi rend='italic'>Kirkcudbright</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. to the Commission of the Assembly sitting at <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>,
to present Overtures to the Parliament for the good of the Kirk, and advancement
of piety, and to prosecute these presented to the preceding Sessions of Parliam. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. to the said Commission to present an Overture to the Parliament, that
Presbyteries may plant the Kirks which are of the patronage of the forfaulted
and Excommunicate Persons. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. to the said Commission, To present an Overture for restraining of printing
without License. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act appointing Mr. <hi rend='italic'>James Woods</hi> entry to S.
<hi rend='italic'>Andrews</hi> To be the first <hi rend='italic'>Tuesday</hi>
of <hi rend='italic'>June</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. to the said Commission for presenting some Overtures to the Parliament for
restraining the education of Youth in the Colledge of <hi rend='italic'>Doway</hi>,
or any other corrupt Colledge. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. of the Summonds against those that joyned with
<hi rend='italic'>Montrose</hi> to the said Commission at
<hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. to the said Commis. concerning Witches and Charmers, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. to the said Commission, To revise the Paraphrase of the Psalms. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. to the said Commis. concerning the transplanting of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Jam.
Nasmith</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Appointment of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Robert Baillie</hi>, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Geo.
Gillespie</hi>, and the Lord <hi rend='italic'>Waristoun</hi>, To repair to
<hi rend='italic'>England</hi> with all diligence. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. of the Summonds against the Subscribers of the Declaration at
<hi rend='italic'>Oxford</hi> to the said Commis. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. of some distressed persons to the charity of Presbyteries and Synods.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="560"/><anchor id="Pg560"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Index of the Acts of the General Assembly
not Printed 1646</hi>.</head>

<p>
Election of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Robert Blair</hi> Moderator
<hi rend='italic'>Sess.</hi> 1.
</p>

<p>
Committee for tryal of the Commissions questioned. Sess. 2.
</p>

<p>
Committee for References, Reports, and Appeals. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Committee for Bills and Overtures. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Committee for examining the proceeding of the Commissioners of the preceding Assembly. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Committee for revising the provincial Books. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Commission from <hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi> for representing the condition of
the Kirk there. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Letters from the Committee at <hi rend='italic'>Newcastle</hi>, the General,
and the Commissioners at <hi rend='italic'>London</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. concerning the printed Papers sent from the Commissioners at
<hi rend='italic'>London</hi> to the Commis. Assem. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Thanks to Mr. <hi rend='italic'>David Calderwood</hi>, with a recommendation to
him concerning the History of the Kirk. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act concerning the charitable contribution for the distressed Brethren in
<hi rend='italic'>Argyle</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Order for re-printing the Answer of the House of Lords to the City of
<hi rend='italic'>Londons</hi> Remonstrance. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. to the Commis. Assem. concerning absents from this Assembly.
<hi rend='italic'>Sess.</hi> 3.
</p>

<p>
Report concerning the Kirks of <hi rend='italic'>Levingstoun</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Slamanna</hi> approven. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. sent by <hi rend='italic'>William Hume</hi> to the Earl of
<hi rend='italic'>Wintoun</hi>, concerning the L. <hi rend='italic'>Semples</hi>
education. <hi rend='italic'>Sess.</hi> 4.
</p>

<p>
Recom. to the province of <hi rend='italic'>Merss</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Tivotdale</hi>, for abolishing Festival and Patron dayes in
these bounds, and to report their diligence to the next Assembly. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Committee for the Querees from the Province of <hi rend='italic'>Merss</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Committee for the Petitions from <hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. for Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Alex. Case</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Committee to confer with Mr. <hi rend='italic'>James Kennedy</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. to the Commis. Assem. for planting the South Kirk of
<hi rend='italic'>Leith</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. concerning the <hi rend='italic'>Spittle-Lands</hi> of
<hi rend='italic'>Garvock</hi> to the Commission of Parliament for plantation of Kirks.
Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act for the supply of <hi rend='italic'>Margaret Rind</hi> relict of Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>Robert Lindsay</hi> Minister at <hi rend='italic'>Couper</hi> in
<hi rend='italic'>Angus</hi>, murdered by the Rebels. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. of the Petition from <hi rend='italic'>Doun</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Antrim</hi> in <hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi>, to the
Commission of Assembly. <hi rend='italic'>Sess.</hi> 5.
</p>

<p>
Committee for the Petition of <hi rend='italic'>Robert Brysons</hi> relict. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act for delating the Querees of <hi rend='italic'>Merss</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Tiviotdale</hi> out of the Provincial Book. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act concerning the Presb. of <hi rend='italic'>Kirkwall</hi>, and Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>Ja. Morison</hi> their rebuke, with the reposition of the
said Mr. <hi rend='italic'>James</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Report from the Earl of <hi rend='italic'>Wintoun</hi>, concerning the
Lord <hi rend='italic'>Sempils</hi> education in <hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Letter from the Commissioners at <hi rend='italic'>London</hi>, with a Committee
to consider the same. <hi rend='italic'>Sess.</hi> 6.
</p>

<p>
Ref. to that same Committee concerning Delinquents. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Concerning the relict of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Rob. Lindsay</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<pb n="561"/><anchor id="Pg561"/>

<p>
Remit. concerning <hi rend='italic'>Michael Watson</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Agnes
Ritchie</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Isabel Adam</hi>, to the Presbytery of
<hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Rec. <hi rend='italic'>Ja. Bannerman</hi> to the Magistrate.
</p>

<p>
Recom. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Robert Boyd</hi> for some supply to the Presbytery
of <hi rend='italic'>Hamiltoun</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ratif. of the Act made concerning the printing Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Boyd</hi> of
<hi rend='italic'>Trochrigs</hi> Book, in favours of the Relick and Successors of
<hi rend='italic'>Robert Bryson</hi> Printer. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Committee for the matter concerning the Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Glenluce</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. for Ministers to imploy their Talents in writing. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act for Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Hay</hi> at <hi rend='italic'>Peebles</hi> going
to the Master of <hi rend='italic'>Testers</hi> Regiment. <hi rend='italic'>Sess. 7.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Recom. for conveening the Commission of Parl. for plantation of Kirks, and concerning
the disorders in the Borders, to the Committee of Estates, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. <hi rend='italic'>Glencorce</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Tweedmore</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Kailzie</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Bath</hi>, to Commis. for
planting Kirks. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Report of the answer of the Committee of Estates, to the particulars
recommended to them. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Committee to consult upon the remedies of the disorders in the south borders. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ordinance for <hi rend='italic'>Claude Hamiltouns</hi> relaxation. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Peter Inglis</hi> and his Tenents to the Commis.
Assem. for publick affairs. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Refer. concerning idle and sturdy beggars, especially these called
<hi rend='italic'>Gipsies</hi>, concerning concealers and destroyers of conception,
adulterers, and incestuous persons to Commis. Assem. for presenting Overtures
thereanent to Parliament. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. of <hi rend='italic'>Arch. Douglas</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Margaret
Smith</hi> for charity. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Thanks to the E. of <hi rend='italic'>Bacleugh</hi>. Sess. 8.
</p>

<p>
Committee concerning the Earl of <hi rend='italic'>Seafort</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. concerning the present election of the Magistrates and Counsel of
<hi rend='italic'>Aberdeen</hi> to the Com. of Estates, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. concerning the transportation of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Rob Ker</hi> to
<hi rend='italic'>Hadingtoun</hi> to the Presbytery and others adjoyned. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. concerning the Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Gordoun</hi> to the Commis. of Assem. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Warrant for examination of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Ja. Daes</hi> as a witness in
the matter concerning the Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Gordoun</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. <hi rend='italic'>Fothringhame</hi> Bigamist to the justice. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Commis. for visitation of the Universitie of St. <hi rend='italic'>Andrews</hi>. Sess. 9.
</p>

<p>
Commis. for visitation of the Universitie of <hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Commis. for visitation of the University of <hi rend='italic'>Aberdeene</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Committee for conference with Mr. <hi rend='italic'>James Kennedie</hi>
excommunicate. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Maccorne</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. concerning Ministers to <hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi> to the Commis. Assem. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. concerning the Petitions of <hi rend='italic'>London-derry</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Newtoun</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Killeleauch</hi>, to the Commis.
Assem. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Cunneson</hi> and Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Thomas
Ireland</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Warrant for citing witnesses in the particulars of the Paper given in by
<hi rend='italic'>Halyburton</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Continuation of Sir <hi rend='italic'>John Mackenzie</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. <hi rend='italic'>Eliz. Borthwick</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Committee concerning <hi rend='italic'>Jam. Murrays</hi> business. Sess. 10.
</p>

<p>
Renounciation Sir <hi rend='italic'>John Mackenzie</hi> of
<hi rend='italic'>Seaforts</hi> Band. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. to Presbyteries that they admit not Expectants to be actual Ministers to
Regiments. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. to Commis. concerning Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Francis Comerie</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Committee for conference with the Committee of Estates upon
<pb n="562"/><anchor id="Pg562"/>
the answer to the Commissioners at <hi rend='italic'>London</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Rec. concerning Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Al. Petrie</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>James Lang</hi> to the Commission for publick Affairs. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. concerning <hi rend='italic'>Rouse's paraphrase</hi> of the Psalms to the Commis. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. to Mr. <hi rend='italic'>David Calderwood</hi> to consider the order of the
visitation of Kirks and tryal of Presbyteries, and to report to the next Assem. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act for Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Thomas Wyllies</hi> removing to
<hi rend='italic'>Mauchlen</hi> conform to the Act of transportation. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. to Presb. <hi rend='italic'>Linlithgow</hi> concerning the planting of
<hi rend='italic'>Linlithgow</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Falkirk</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. for intimation of <hi rend='italic'>Seaforts</hi> excommunication. Sess. 11.
</p>

<p>
Letter from the Commissioners at <hi rend='italic'>London</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>9 Junii</hi>.
</p>

<p>
The Assemb. Answer to the Commissioners at <hi rend='italic'>London</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act concerning the Lord <hi rend='italic'>Scottistarbets</hi> delivery of the
authentick Confession of Faith, subscribed by King <hi rend='italic'>James</hi> and
his Houshold, with an order for Thanks to him therefore. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Town of <hi rend='italic'>Edinburghs</hi> Bill for three Ministers laid aside. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. concerning <hi rend='italic'>Aberchirdor</hi>, and
<hi rend='italic'>Innerkething</hi> to the Commis. for visitation of the University of
<hi rend='italic'>Aberdene</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. <hi rend='italic'>Margary Fraiser</hi>, relick of Mr. D.
<hi rend='italic'>Houston</hi> to the Committee of losses. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Alexander Forrester</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. <hi rend='italic'>Margaret Campbel</hi> to the Committee of Estates. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. of <hi rend='italic'>Agnes Halyburton</hi> to the Presb. of
<hi rend='italic'>Merss</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Tiviotdale</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Acts concerning <hi rend='italic'>Ja. Murray</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. to the Commis. Ass. to consider the Interests of the Kirk in planting
Universities and the chief Masters thereof. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. concerning the publick passages of thir times, to be collected in several
Presbyteries, and sent to the Com. Assem. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. <hi rend='italic'>Jean Alexander</hi> to the Presb. of
<hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, and the Presbyteries in
<hi rend='italic'>Angus</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Merns</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. Sir <hi rend='italic'>William Dick</hi> to the Committee of Estates, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Order for Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Alexander Levingston</hi> to the General
Artilleries Regiment. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Thomas Crawfoord</hi> to revise Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>Robert Boyds</hi> Works. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. to Presb. to put in execution on the former Acts concerning Bursars,
and to make account of their diligence to the next Assembly. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Admonition Presb. <hi rend='italic'>Hamiltoun</hi> for proceeding against
<hi rend='italic'>Alexander Taes</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Relaxation of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Hay</hi> from the sentence of suspension. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Committee to represent the Bill concerning the insolencies in the Borders,
to the Councill and Committee. Sess. 12.
</p>

<p>
Recom. Ministers of Argyle to the Committees. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Commiss. concerning the particulars betwixt <hi rend='italic'>John Wilkie</hi> of
<hi rend='italic'>Fouldoum</hi> and Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Thomas Ramsay</hi>
Minister there. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Advice concerning the division of <hi rend='italic'>Basinden</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Committee to urge an answer to the desires of the Assem. concerning the
election of the Magistrates of <hi rend='italic'>Aberdeen</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. to the Commiss. of Assem. to insist upon all occasions for an answer thereunto. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. to the said Commission of Assem. for planting vaking places in the Kirk and
Colledge of <hi rend='italic'>Aberdeen</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Letters to the Committee of <hi rend='italic'>Newcastle</hi>, the General, Lieut.
General <hi rend='italic'>Lesly</hi>, and General Major
<hi rend='italic'>Middletoun</hi>. Sess. 13.
</p>

<pb n="563"/><anchor id="Pg563"/>

<p>
Ref. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Edward Wright</hi> to the Commiss. of Assem. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Renovation of the Commission of <hi rend='italic'>Orknay</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Zetland</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. concerning Witches to the Commission of Assemb. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. of the Printer in <hi rend='italic'>Amsterdam</hi> his Bill concerning the
Charts of this Kingdom. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Suspension of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>William Wilkie</hi> with a reference to
the Commis. of Assem. concerning his relaxation. Sess. 14.
</p>

<p>
Ref. Commis. Assem. concerning Doctor <hi rend='italic'>Balcanquals</hi> Letters. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. of the Petitions of the Earl of <hi rend='italic'>Traquair</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Drumfreis</hi> to the Commis. Assem. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act in favours of <hi rend='italic'>Barbara Mein</hi>, relick of umwhile
Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Will. Home</hi> Minister. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Order for a Minister to Col. <hi rend='italic'>Robert Montgomeries</hi> Regiment. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. Sir <hi rend='italic'>John Smith</hi> to Commis. Assem. for publick affairs. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. of the Petition of the Town of <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi> for
two Ministers to the Commis. Assem. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Report of the Committee concerning the Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Glenluce</hi>,
and the Assem. approbation thereof. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act concerning such as are absolved by civil Judicatories. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Declaration concerning an Act in the Provincial Book of
<hi rend='italic'>Aberdeen</hi>, touching Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Nathaniel Martin</hi>,
Sess. ult.
</p>

<p>
Recom. of the vaking stipends of <hi rend='italic'>Aberdeen</hi>, in favours
of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Nathaniel Martin</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. concerning the mortifications by the Laird of <hi rend='italic'>Drum</hi>
to the Commis. for visitation of the University of <hi rend='italic'>Aberdeen</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act concerning the distribution of the contribution for the distressed Ministers in
<hi rend='italic'>Argyle</hi>, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Tho. Ireland</hi>, and
Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Cunneson</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Report of the Committee concerning the Insolencies in the Borders, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Refer. Commis. concerning the planting the Kirks of <hi rend='italic'>Perth</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. concerning the correspondence with the Protestants in
<hi rend='italic'>Holland</hi> and elsewhere. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. concerning the recom. of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Eleazer Gilbert</hi> to
a Regiment. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Gawin Forsythe</hi> for maintenance to the Presb.
of <hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi> and Province of <hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Air</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. of that part without the Town of <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi> called
<hi rend='italic'>Bristo</hi> to <hi rend='italic'>Lothian</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Teviotdale</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Three Acts concerning D. <hi rend='italic'>Strang</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act ratifying Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Alex. Innes</hi> his deposition, with an
Ordinance to the Presb. of <hi rend='italic'>Aberdeen</hi> to proceed farther
against him. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Committee for presenting the Assemblies Thanks to the General Artillery. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. to the Commis. Assem. for trying of the murther committed within the
Presbytery of <hi rend='italic'>Chirnsyde</hi>, and the Presbyteries carriage
thereanent. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Alex. Robertson</hi> and Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John
Cheine</hi>, to the Commis. for visitation of the University of
<hi rend='italic'>Aberdeen</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ordinance for Presb. of <hi rend='italic'>Hamiltoun</hi> to proceed against Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>John Rae</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. for laying aside some old customes and practises. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Indiction of a Fast. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Dougal Daroch</hi> to the Committee of Estates
and the Committee of money. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. to the Commis. of Assem. concerning the tryal of persons of Quality Members of
the Colledge of Justice, or others who have their residence in
<hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi> for their complyance with the Rebels. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Commission for these that are to repair to the King. Ib.
</p>

<p>
The Assemblies Letter to Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Alex. Henderson</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<pb n="564"/><anchor id="Pg564"/>

<p>
Letter to the Earl of <hi rend='italic'>Sutherland</hi> and other Gentlemen in the
<hi rend='italic'>North</hi> Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. Commis. for dispensing the annuity of 500 £. Sterling upon publick affairs of
the Kirk, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act to provide for the charges and all necessaries for Mr. <hi rend='italic'>David
Calderwood</hi> in his publick imployments; And likewise for the great pains and
charges of the Clerk. Ib
</p>

<p>
Act concerning Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Ja. Strachan</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Ref. to the Commission to consider of Overtures for restraining any youths to go
to the Colledge of <hi rend='italic'>Doway</hi>, or other corrupt Colledges Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. to the Commis. for presenting Overtures to the Parliament. Ib.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Index of the Acts of the General Assembly
holden at</hi> Edinburgh, 1647, <hi rend='italic'>not printed</hi>.</head>

<p>
Election of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Robert Douglass</hi> Moderator. Sess. 1.
</p>

<p>
Committee for the controverted Commissions, Sess. 2.
</p>

<p>
Committee of Reports, References and Appeals, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Commit. of Bills and Overtures. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Committee for examining the proceedings of the Commission of the preceeding Assembly
for publick Affairs. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Committee for examining the Synod Books. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Commission from the Brethren in <hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi> with the
<hi rend='italic'>Scots</hi> Army there. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Committee for appointing Ministers to Preach. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Papers produced by Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Robert Baillie</hi>, and Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>George Gillespie</hi>. Sess. 3.
</p>

<p>
Act concerning their Report and Approbation, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Committee for examining the Confession of Faith, <hi rend='italic'>Rouse</hi>
Paraphrase, Catechisme, &amp;c. and to receive any scruples and objections, and
to report. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act appointing some Brethren to present to the Committee of Estates, the
progress of Uniformity. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Invitation of all that had objections against any thing in the Confession, to
repair to the Committee. Sess. 4.
</p>

<p>
A Latine Letter from the <hi rend='italic'>Helvetian</hi> Churches to the Assembly, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act for Printing 300. Copies of the advice of the Assembly of Divines in
<hi rend='italic'>Engl.</hi> Concerning a Confession of Faith, for the use
of the Members of the Assembly, Sess. 5.
</p>

<p>
Recom. to the Commission for planting of Kirks, for a provision to another
Minister in <hi rend='italic'>Aire</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. to the Committee for Preaching, to appoint Ministers to the Army, with
addition of others to that Committee, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Appointment of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Robert Young</hi> for <hi rend='italic'>Lodevick
Leslies</hi> Regiment. Sess. 6.
</p>

<p>
Committee for considering the dangers that are either from within or without this
Kirk, and the best remedies for preventing the same, and to report. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Committee concerning <hi rend='italic'>John Wilkie</hi> and Master
<hi rend='italic'>Tho. Ramsay</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Remitt. <hi rend='italic'>John Johnstouns</hi> desire of relaxation from Excommunication
to the provincial of <hi rend='italic'>Drumfreis</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<pb n="565"/><anchor id="Pg565"/>

<p>
Committee for the vaking Stipends in <hi rend='italic'>Dunkeld</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. <hi rend='italic'>Marjory Smith</hi> for charity, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Remitt. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>James Rosse</hi> a deposed Minister to
Presbytery and Synod, Sess. 7.
</p>

<p>
Ref. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>James Nasmith</hi> to the Committee for appointing
Ministers to the Army, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Committee for considering a Process in dependence before the Presbytery of
<hi rend='italic'>Peebles</hi>, concerning a scandal upon the relick of
umwhile <hi rend='italic'>Mark Hamiltoun</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Continuation of the Town of <hi rend='italic'>Edinburghs</hi> Bill for Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>John Smith</hi>, till <hi rend='italic'>Saturday</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Advice and Ordinance for prosecuting the Process against <hi rend='italic'>Agnes
Stewart</hi>, relick of Umwhile <hi rend='italic'>Mark Hamiltoun</hi>. Sess. 8.
</p>

<p>
Recom. of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>George Claghorne</hi> that he suffer no prejudice
in his old Age, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Transportation of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Scot</hi> from
<hi rend='italic'>Schottis</hi> to <hi rend='italic'>Glenluce</hi>, Sess. 9.
</p>

<p>
Act refusing Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Andrew Honymans</hi> transportation to
<hi rend='italic'>Craill</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Transportation of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>James Hamiltoun</hi> from
<hi rend='italic'>Dumfreis</hi> to <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act concerning the planting of <hi rend='italic'>Eymonth</hi> Kirk upon the
Submission of Earl <hi rend='italic'>Home</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Wedderburne</hi>, Sess. 10.
</p>

<p>
Act concerning the tryal of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>William Home</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Transportation of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Smith</hi> from
<hi rend='italic'>Bruntiland</hi> to <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act for providing a Collegue to Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Thomas Wyllie</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. <hi rend='italic'>Thom. Burnet</hi> to the Committee of Estates, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Martine Mackferson</hi> to the Committee of Estates, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Neill Mackinnan</hi> to the Committee of Estates. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act concerning the Visitation of <hi rend='italic'>Kailzae</hi>
and <hi rend='italic'>Lyne</hi>, Sess. 11.
</p>

<p>
Recom. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Houstouns</hi> Petition to the Commission for
planting of Kirks, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act for Excommunicating of <hi rend='italic'>William Forbes</hi> of
<hi rend='italic'>Skelleier</hi>, his committing a late murther
being sufficiently evidenced. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Transportation of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Walter Comrie</hi> to
<hi rend='italic'>Dunkeld</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act for conference with <hi rend='italic'>James Urquhart</hi> of old
<hi rend='italic'>Craige</hi>, desiring to be relaxed from Excommunication, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act appointing Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Lothian</hi> to be
relaxed from the sentence of Suspension. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. Petition of the Presbytery of <hi rend='italic'>Wigtoun</hi>, for
erecting a Kirk for <hi rend='italic'>Penningham</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Monigafe</hi>, To the Commission of Parliament for planting
of Kirks. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Committee for the matter betwixt <hi rend='italic'>John Wilkie</hi> of
<hi rend='italic'>Foulden</hi>, and Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Thomas Ramsay</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act appointing the Committee of Bills, to divide the Petitions for charity
amongst Presbyteries and Provinces, Sess. 12.
</p>

<p>
Act appointing the Committee concerning Dr. <hi rend='italic'>Strang</hi> to meet. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act refusing Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Levingstouns</hi> transportation to
<hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Refer. to the Committee of dangers, to give opinion in the question concerning
the carriages of our Commissioners at <hi rend='italic'>London</hi> in the
case propounded. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. to the committee of dangers, concerning choosing a Moderator, and censure
of absents from the Assembly, Sess. 13.
</p>

<p>
Ref. <hi rend='italic'>James Urquhart</hi> of old <hi rend='italic'>Craige</hi>,
concerning his relaxation from Excommunication, to the Provincial of
<hi rend='italic'>Murray</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Committee appointed to confer in some particulars, concerning Ministers
provisions with my Lord Advocate, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Committee concerning the particulars
<pb n="566"/><anchor id="Pg566"/>
of Master <hi rend='italic'>Eleazer Gilberts</hi> petition, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. <hi rend='italic'>Gilbert Ogilvie</hi> of <hi rend='italic'>Craige</hi>,
Major <hi rend='italic'>John Ogilvie</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>Patrick Ogilvie</hi>
of <hi rend='italic'>Brigend</hi> of <hi rend='italic'>Lentrathane</hi>, to the
Presbytery of <hi rend='italic'>Macgill</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Instruction with a Letter to the Commissioners at <hi rend='italic'>London</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Appointment of some to speak Earl <hi rend='italic'>Bacleuch</hi> concerning the
Kirk at <hi rend='italic'>Borthwick</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Ref. concerning Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Zachary Boyds</hi> labours to the Committee
for the Confession of Faith. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Committee to consider of Ministers for <hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Act continuing the Declaration for <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, to
be again read and farther considered. Sess. 14.
</p>

<p>
Committee for hearing the Objections of the persons appointed for
<hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. to Presbyteries for encouraging Expectants to embrace a calling from
<hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. to the Committee for Preaching, to hear the reasons alledged by some
Ministers why they should not go to the Army. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act refusing Master <hi rend='italic'>John Robertsons</hi> Petition for opening
his mouth. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Approbation of the Declaration for <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>. Sess. 15.
</p>

<p>
Act for authorizing the Commissioners at <hi rend='italic'>London</hi>, to present
the Declaration to the Parliament of <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, City of
<hi rend='italic'>London</hi>, and Synode of Divines, and to crave an answer to
the Paper of the 25 <hi rend='italic'>December</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act appointing some Brethren to present the Declaration for
<hi rend='italic'>England</hi> to the Committee of Estates, and to crave their
Lordships concurrance in the like desires. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Act continuing the Directions for Private and Family Worship, to be farther Considered
and again read, with an Invitation to all that had any scruples to propone them to
the Committee of dangers <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Act for joyning the Committee for the Confession of Faith, to the Committee for
dangers together to be one Committee, and their place of meeting to be the old
Session-house, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Invitation of all that had any scruples or objections concerning any Article in
the Confession, to propone the same to the Committee. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Report of the Committee touching the particulars in Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>Gilberts</hi> Petition, with an appointment for drawing a Letter
to those of the <hi rend='italic'>Scottish</hi> Nation in <hi rend='italic'>Poland</hi>,
&amp;c. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Appoint. for drawing a Letter to Lieutenant General <hi rend='italic'>David Lesly</hi>.
Sess. 16.
</p>

<p>
Appoint. of Ministers for <hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Letter to Major General <hi rend='italic'>Monro</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Continuation of the Directions for Worship, to be again read and considered upon
<hi rend='italic'>Tuesday</hi>, and all invited to address themselves to the
Committee who had doubts or objections. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Committee for thinking on Overtures for planting the Kirks in the
<hi rend='italic'>Highlands</hi>, and advancing Piety and Learning there.
<hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Recom. to the Ministers of <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi> for their assistance to
Ministers before the Commission for planting of Kirks. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Committee to confer with the Lord Treasurer, concerning the Kings gift of Patronage
of <hi rend='italic'>Lanerk</hi>, and to advise with the Committee for dangers upon the
Kirks interest therein. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Recom. of the Petition of the Presbyteries of <hi rend='italic'>Deir</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Ellon</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>Turres</hi>, to the Commission for
planting of Kirks, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Recom. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Neil Mackinnan</hi> and
<pb n="567"/><anchor id="Pg567"/>
<hi rend='italic'>Martin Mackferson</hi>, to be supported out of the vaking
Stipends in the <hi rend='italic'>Sky</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Ref. to the Commission for publick affairs for the planting of
<hi rend='italic'>Drumfreis.</hi> with a recommendation to the Treasurer for
a presentation. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Recom. to the Commission of Estates, concerning the house of
<hi rend='italic'>Dalgetie</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Act appointing Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Gabriel Maxwell</hi> for the Lieutenant
General, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>James Nasmith</hi> for General Major
<hi rend='italic'>Holburns</hi> Regiment, Mr <hi rend='italic'>George Pittillo</hi>
for the General Artilleries Regiment. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>George Bonnet</hi> for
the Troups of Horse with the General Lieutenant, and Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John
Lothian</hi> for the Squadron of Horse with General Major
<hi rend='italic'>Middletoun</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Remit. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Francis Orney</hi> to the Presbytery and Synode, Sess. 17.
</p>

<p>
Ordinance for admission of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Baillie</hi> to the Kirk
of <hi rend='italic'>Cambuslang</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Committee to confer with Earl of <hi rend='italic'>Eglingtoun</hi>, concerning his
petition touching planting the Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Eglisham</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Recom. to the Committee of Estates, of the petition of <hi rend='italic'>Aberdeen</hi>
concerning a Jesuit there, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Remit. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Matthew Ramsay</hi> to the Presbytery of
<hi rend='italic'>Hamiltoun</hi> for opening his mouth, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Ref. and Commission concerning the Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Lyndean</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Committee for revising the Collectors counts, and to report, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Report of the Brethren sent to the Committee of Estates, concerning the house of
<hi rend='italic'>Dalgety</hi>, and the Jesuit in <hi rend='italic'>Aberdene</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Advice to the Presbytery of <hi rend='italic'>Stranrauer</hi>, concerning their
proceeding in the trial of the scandal upon <hi rend='italic'>Ardwell</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Ref. to the Committee of dangers, to think upon some Overtures for commodious planting,
dividing, and uniting of Kirks, and to report. Sess. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. of some Persons for charity to Presb. and Provinces, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. of the petition concerning <hi rend='italic'>Glencorse</hi> to the Lord
Tresaurer, and the Lords of Exchequer, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. Sir <hi rend='italic'>Lauchlen Macklen</hi> to the Presbytery of
<hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. to the Committee of Estates, of the petition of Master
<hi rend='italic'>Adam Barcley</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. of the Petition of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Patick Lindsay</hi> to the Committee
of Estates, and to the charity of the Presbyteries within the Province of
<hi rend='italic'>Aberdene.</hi> Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. to the Presbytery of <hi rend='italic'>Stranrauer</hi> and the Lord
Advocate, concerning the Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Glenluce</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Addition of the Lord Marquess of <hi rend='italic'>Argile</hi> to the Commitee for
the dangers, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Appointment of the Committee concerning Doctor <hi rend='italic'>Strang</hi>, to
make report and to receive any objections that any had against his dictates,
<hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Warrand for Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Samuel Rutherfords</hi> return, Sess. Ib.
</p>

<p>
A Letter to General Lieutenant <hi rend='italic'>David Leslie</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Invitation of all to propone their doubts or objections against any head or
Article in the Confession of Faith, to the Committee, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Recom. to the Commission, for visitation of the University of
<hi rend='italic'>St. Andrews</hi>, for Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Samuel Rutherford</hi>
to be Principal of the new Colledge there, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Approbation of the report concerning planting of <hi rend='italic'>Eglishame</hi>,
Sess. 20.
</p>

<p>
Recom. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Robert Lindsayes</hi> wife, and Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Jam.
Kirk</hi> to Provinces <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Appointment of some Brethren to visit the Idolatrous Monuments
<pb n="568"/><anchor id="Pg568"/>
brought from the late Marquess of <hi rend='italic'>Huntlies</hi> house,
<hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Act refusing the petition for Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Annans</hi> transportation
to <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act concerning the Dyet of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>James Hamiltoun</hi> and
Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Smiths</hi> coming to <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. to the Town of <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi> to plant all their Kirks with
two Ministers with diligence, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Quere proponed by the Commissioners of the Presbytery of
<hi rend='italic'>Chirnside</hi>, with the Assemblies advice thereanent,
<hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Recom. of petitions for charity, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Appoint. of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Forbes</hi> for Collonel
<hi rend='italic'>Scots</hi> Regiment, and Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Ro. Cowdoun</hi>
to <hi rend='italic'>Pitscotties</hi>. Sess. 21.
</p>

<p>
Nominatien of a list for a Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Gordon</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. concerning Mr. <hi rend='italic'>David Leith</hi> Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. concerning the conttribution for the distressed people in
<hi rend='italic'>Argyle</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Approbation of the report of the Committee for the vaking Stipends in
<hi rend='italic'>Dunkeld</hi>, Sess. 22.
</p>

<p>
Recom. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Robert Brounlies</hi> wife to the Commit. of
Estates. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Commission for planting the Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Linlithgow</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Declaration that some votes of the Commission of the preceding Assembly upon the 21
of <hi rend='italic'>August</hi> 1646. and an Act of the 22. of the same month, are
not to be examined by the Assembly, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Committee for the trial of some speeches spoken by some of the Presbytery of
<hi rend='italic'>Dunkeld</hi> concerning the Commission, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Ref. concerning Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Will. Hay</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act concerning the committing of the plantation of the Kirk of
<hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. to the Commission for publick Affairs of the Earl of
<hi rend='italic'>Callenders</hi> petition, concerning the adjoyning
<hi rend='italic'>Falkirk, Slammane</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>Morreningside</hi>
to the Presbytery of <hi rend='italic'>Sterling</hi>, with power to hear parties
visit, and report, Sess. 23.
</p>

<p>
Conference appointed with the Earl of <hi rend='italic'>Abercorne</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. to the Commission for publick affairs, for planting in
<hi rend='italic'>Airea</hi> Collegue to Mr. <hi rend='italic'>William Adair</hi>, Ib
</p>

<p>
Report concerning Doctor <hi rend='italic'>Strangs</hi> dictats,
<hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Act appointing the Clerk to redeliver Doctor <hi rend='italic'>Strangs</hi> dictats
unto him, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Ref. concerning Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Mackenzie</hi>, Sess. 24.
</p>

<p>
Approbation of the Collectors accounts, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Ref. to the Ministers of <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, to take course with the
Monuments of Idolatry brought from the <hi rend='italic'>North</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. of the petition for a Minister to <hi rend='italic'>Chanrie</hi> of
<hi rend='italic'>Rosse</hi> to the Commis. for planting or Kirks,
<hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Recom. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Alexander Petrie</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Eleazar Gilbert</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>William Douglas</hi> to the Committee of Estates,
<hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Recom. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>George Sharpe</hi> to the Committee of Estates for
reparation of his losses, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Ref. complyers in <hi rend='italic'>Murray</hi> to the Provincial,
<hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Recom. to the Commission for planting of Kirks, concerning provisions to Ministers in
the Presbytery of <hi rend='italic'>Kirkendbright</hi>, Sess. 25.
</p>

<p>
Act appointing conference with Earl <hi rend='italic'>Abercorne</hi>, until the last
of <hi rend='italic'>March</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. to the Synod of <hi rend='italic'>Murray</hi> of the petition of
<hi rend='italic'>Badinoch</hi>, concerning Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Dollar</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. concerning the Minister of <hi rend='italic'>Corrie</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Hutton</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. to the Commission for planting of Kirks, concerning the adjoyning some lands
to the Parish of <hi rend='italic'>Monswall</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act for Printing the Directory for
<pb n="569"/><anchor id="Pg569"/>
Church Government, to be examined by Presbyteries against the next Assembly, and for
Printing the Catechism also when it shall be perfected, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Act concerning the contribution for the distressed people in
<hi rend='italic'>Argyle</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. to Committee for dangers, to consider of a Letter for the
<hi rend='italic'>Scots</hi> in <hi rend='italic'>Poland</hi>, &amp;c. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. to the Committee appointed for tryal of proceedings of the Commission of Assembly,
to consider of the process of Master <hi rend='italic'>John Rosse</hi>, and to
report, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Act concerning the tryal of the payment of the contribution for distressed people
of <hi rend='italic'>Argyle</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act concerning <hi rend='italic'>Ja. Murray</hi> Sess. 26.
</p>

<p>
Act for collecting the contribution for the Province of <hi rend='italic'>Argyle</hi>,
in these parts that have not yet contributed, and sending it to the receivers.
<hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Recom. to the Synod of <hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi>, concerning a second Minister
to <hi rend='italic'>Dumbarton</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. to the Lords of Privy Council for punishing an injury done to a Presbytery
about burying in a Kirk. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Act appointing a conference with some Divines, Lawyers, and Physitians, concerning
witchcraft and charming, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Report of the tryal of the Synods Books with the Assemblies censure,
<hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Appointment of some to salute the Lieutenant General now in Town and General Major
<hi rend='italic'>Middletoun</hi> when he comes, <hi rend='italic'>Sess. 27.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Ref. to the Commission for publick affairs to endeavour for obtaining from the
Parliament, some restraint of Burials in Kirks, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Commission for visitation of <hi rend='italic'>Lochaber, Badenoch</hi>, and the
Isles, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Recom. to the Commission of Parliament for planting of Kirks, for providing some
course for the payment of the charges of Commissioners to the General Assembly,
<hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Ref. to the Commission for publick affairs, for Printing of some Papers concerning the
Treaty of Uniformity, and matters handled in the Synod of Divines in
<hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. and warrand to the Commission for publick affairs, to give license
for Printing, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Recom. to the Lords of the Exchequer, concerning the passing of gifts of the
Prebendaries, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Report from <hi rend='italic'>Robert Bryson's</hi> Relick, concerning the Printing of
<hi rend='italic'>Trochrigs</hi> Works, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Warrand given to the Moderator and Clerk, and some others, to agree with
<hi rend='italic'>Evan Tayler</hi> for Printing the Works of
<hi rend='italic'>Trochrig</hi> upon the condition promised to
<hi rend='italic'>Robert Bryson</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. <hi rend='italic'>John Wilkie</hi> of <hi rend='italic'>Foulden</hi> and
Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Thomas Ramsay</hi> to the Commission for publick affairs. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act concerning the choosing of the Moderator of the General Assembly, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act for changing every Assembly the rolls of the Commissioners by courses, according to
the order of Provinces. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Commission for Visiting the University of St. <hi rend='italic'>Andrews</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Commission for visiting the University of <hi rend='italic'>Aberdeen</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Commission for visiting <hi rend='italic'>Orkney</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Zetland</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Appointment of some Brethren to speak to the Lord Treasurer, concerning passing of
gifts of Patronage, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Ref. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Rosse</hi> at <hi rend='italic'>Lunfannan</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Sess. 28.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Approbation of the report concerning
<pb n="570"/><anchor id="Pg570"/>
planting of Kirks in the <hi rend='italic'>Highlands</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. <hi rend='italic'>John Gillon</hi> to the Presbytery of
<hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi> for private tryal, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Renovation of the Commission for publick affairs, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Warrand for Mr. <hi rend='italic'>James Gordon</hi> to come to
<hi rend='italic'>Sterling-shire</hi>, for drawing the Mappe thereof,
<hi rend='italic'>Sess. ult.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Ref. of <hi rend='italic'>Gorthie</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Inchbrakie</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Lindsay</hi> of <hi rend='italic'>Mans</hi>, their Petitions for
relaxation from the sentence of Excommunication, to the Commission for publick
affairs, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. in favours of Sir <hi rend='italic'>William Dick</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. Master <hi rend='italic'>James Row</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. to the Commission for publick affairs concerning the
<hi rend='italic'>Scots</hi> in <hi rend='italic'>Poland</hi>, &amp;c. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. for planting the Kirk and Colledge of <hi rend='italic'>Aberdeen</hi> to the
Commission for publick affairs, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. concerning Mr. <hi rend='italic'>William Douglas</hi>, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John
Logie</hi>, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>George Hanney</hi>, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Richard
Maitland</hi> and Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Coline Mackenzie</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. and Commission concerning the tryalof Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Murdo Mackenzie</hi>,
Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Duncane</hi>, and Mr. <hi rend='italic'>William Cowper</hi>,
Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>William Chalmers</hi> to Committee of Estates, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. <hi rend='italic'>James Grahame</hi> of <hi rend='italic'>Claypots</hi> to
the Presbytery of <hi rend='italic'>Dundee</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. of some persons for charity, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. for planting the Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Bruntiland</hi> to the Commission for
publick affairs, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. concerning the planting of the Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Prestoun</hi> to the
Commission for publick Affairs, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. for planting the vaking Kirk in <hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi> to the Commission
for publick affairs, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. the Lord <hi rend='italic'>Ray</hi> his Son and some of his Friends to the
Comission for publick affairs, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Gilbert Gordon</hi> to the Commission for publick affairs, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. for Mr. <hi rend='italic'>George Hannayes</hi> wife and children, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act for presenting the Confession of Faith to the Parliament, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act concerning the Translators of the <hi rend='italic'>Dutch</hi> Notes, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. and Ref. concerning the collecting of the passages and Occurrances of these late
times, to the Commis. for publick affairs, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. for planting the Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Ancrum</hi>, to the
Commission for publick affairs, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Renovation of the Commission for visitation of the University of
<hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Rosse</hi> at <hi rend='italic'>Birse</hi>, to
the Synod of <hi rend='italic'>Aberdeen</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Thomas Ramsey</hi> younger, his petition to
the Commission for publick affairs. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Indiction of a Thansgiving and of a Fast. Ib.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>INDEX of the Unprinted ACTS of the
General Assembly held at</hi> Edinburgh. 1648.</head>

<p>
Election of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>George Gillespie</hi>, Moderator,
<hi rend='italic'>Sess.</hi> 1.
</p>

<p>
Recom to the Magistrates of <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, for accomodating the
Assembly-house for the Members thereof, <hi rend='italic'>Sess.</hi> 2.
</p>

<p>
Committee for the controvered Commissions, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Committee for References and Appeals, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Committee for Bills and Overtures, Ib.
</p>

<pb n="571"/><anchor id="Pg571"/>

<p>
Committe for trial of the proceedings of the Commission of the preceeding Assembly. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Committee for revising the Provincial Books, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Committee for appointing Ministers to Preach during the Sitting of the Assembly, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Committee to consider the present dangers and duties of these times, and other publick
matters, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. to the Committee to consider of the said Elections of Commissioners from
Burghs, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act concerning the Commission from <hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act rejecting the Commission from the Presbytery of <hi rend='italic'>Chirnside</hi>,
Sess. 3.
</p>

<p>
Letter to the Laird of <hi rend='italic'>Blacader</hi>, Elder in the said
Commission, to clear the Assemblies respects to him. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act refusing the Commission from <hi rend='italic'>Dunse</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Meeting of the Commissioners from several Provinces to try the blasphemies and
insolences of the Army, now forth in the late Engagement against
<hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, and to report, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act concerning Mr. <hi rend='italic'>James Aitkin</hi>, Sess. 4.
</p>

<p>
Commission for Visitation of the Presbyteries of <hi rend='italic'>Dunse</hi>
and <hi rend='italic'>Chirnside</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Committee for hearing the report concerning the Paraphrase of the Psalms in Meetter, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. to the Committee for publick matters, to take in the reports concerning the
Directory of Government, Catechisme, and CXI. Propositions. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. in favours of the relicks of Doctor <hi rend='italic'>Sharpe</hi>, and Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>R. Brounlies</hi> to the Commit. of Estates <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Petition from the Army lately gone to <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, Sess. 5.
</p>

<p>
The offers and desires of the Committee of Estates of the
<hi rend='italic'>17 July</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Quere to the Committee of Estates, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. to the Lord Theasurer for the Arrears of the annuity of 500l.
<hi rend='italic'>Sterl.</hi> Ib.
</p>

<p>
Answer to the Quere from the Committee of Estates <hi rend='italic'>17 July</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Return to the Committee of Estates, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. Petitions from <hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi> for Ministers to a Committee. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Modification to Mr. <hi rend='italic'>David Calderwood</hi> for his publick
imployments, Sess. 6.
</p>

<p>
Modification to the Clerk of the Assembly for his service, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Paper from the Committee of Estates of the <hi rend='italic'>18 July</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
The Assemblies return to the said Paper, Ib.
</p>

<p>
The Committee of Estates answer to the said return, Ib.
</p>

<p>
The Assemblies Return to the said answer, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Another Paper from the Committee of Estates of the <hi rend='italic'>18.
July</hi>. Sess. 7.
</p>

<p>
Answer to the Paper last sent from the Committee of Estates, bearing a power to
certain Members of the Assembly to confer with their Lordships, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Answer to Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Patrick Hamiltoun</hi>, denying his desire for
opening his mouth, with a Recommendation in his favours, Sess. 8.
</p>

<p>
Remit. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>James Rosse</hi> to Presbytery and Synod. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. to Presbytery of <hi rend='italic'>Dunkeld</hi> concerning vaking Stipends, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Approbation of the Act of the Commission of the preceeding Assembly concerning the
Collecting of the History of the time. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. to the Clerk for Printing the publick Papers, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. to the Clerk for re-printing the Confession of Faith with the Assemblies
Approbation. Sess. 9.
</p>

<p>
Recom. to Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Robert Dowglas</hi> for printing two of his Sermons, Ib.
</p>

<pb n="572"/><anchor id="Pg572"/>

<p>
Remit to the Presbytery of <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi> concerning the
Service-books and Idolatrous Monuments, now lying in the
<hi rend='italic'>High-School yard</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Committee for considering <hi rend='italic'>James Murrays</hi> business, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Paper from the Committee of Estates of the <hi rend='italic'>20 July</hi>, Sess. 10.
</p>

<p>
The Assemblies Answer thereto with an appointment for conference, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Order for citing <hi rend='italic'>Patrick Lesly</hi> Provost of
<hi rend='italic'>Aberdeen</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. to the Committee of Estates concerning his miscariage. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Ref. concerning insolences and blasphemies of the Souldiers to the Commission for
publick affairs, Sess. 11.
</p>

<p>
Paper from the Committee of Estates of the <hi rend='italic'>22 July</hi> concerning the
conference, and concerning <hi rend='italic'>Patrick Lesly</hi>, Sess. 12.
</p>

<p>
The Assemblies answer to the said Paper, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Act concerning Mr. <hi rend='italic'>George Clerk</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act refusing Mr. <hi rend='italic'>George Hutchesons</hi> transportation to
<hi rend='italic'>Air</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Motion verbally from the Committee for Ministers to the Army, with the Assemblies
answer thereunto. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Act concerning <hi rend='italic'>Patrick Leslies</hi> answers, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Paper from the Committee of Estates of the <hi rend='italic'>24 July</hi>. Sess. 13.
</p>

<p>
Ref. of the said paper to the Committee for publick business to consider of an
answer, and report their opinions, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Act concerning <hi rend='italic'>Patrick Lesly</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Appointment of a letter to Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Hew Henderson</hi> for setling in
<hi rend='italic'>Dumfries</hi> according to the sentence of transportation,
<hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Ref. for planting a Collegue in Air to the Commission for publick affairs,
<hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Ref. of the remedies of the sins of the times to the Committee which was appointed for
trial of the Commission of the preceeding Assembly, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Ref. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Walter Comries</hi> transportation to the Committee of
bills, and they to report, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Appointment that all bills, appeals, references, reports, &amp;c. be given in before
<hi rend='italic'>Wednesday</hi> next, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Paper from the Committee concerning <hi rend='italic'>Patrick Lesly</hi>, Sess. 14.
</p>

<p>
The Assemblies answer thereunto, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Ref. <hi rend='italic'>Patrick Lesly</hi> to a Committee for conference,
<hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Suspens. Mr <hi rend='italic'>Harie Cockburn</hi>, Sess. 15.
</p>

<p>
Vote sustaining the summons concerning the transportation of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John
Levingstoun</hi> to <hi rend='italic'>Ancrum</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Durie</hi> to the Earl of
<hi rend='italic'>Hadingtoun</hi>, Sess. 16.
</p>

<p>
Ref. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Samuel Douglas</hi> to the visitation of
<hi rend='italic'>Dunse</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Chirnside</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. the dissent of the Brethren in the Provincial of <hi rend='italic'>Merse</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Tiviotdale</hi> to the said visitation, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. concerning Ministers to <hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi> to the Commission
to be appointed for publick affairs, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Advice concerning discipline to be used, with the Garisons and Regiments in
<hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Letter to General Major <hi rend='italic'>Monro</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. for planting the Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Bruntiland</hi> to the Commission to
be appointed for publick affairs, Sess. 17.
</p>

<p>
Recom. concerning <hi rend='italic'>James Murrayes</hi> children, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. to the Commission of Parliament for planting of Kirks the adjoyning
<hi rend='italic'>Sutherland</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Sutherlandhall</hi>, &amp;c.
to <hi rend='italic'>Lindean</hi> and making it a distinct Parish,
<hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<pb n="573"/><anchor id="Pg573"/>

<p>
Recom. for keeping in the <hi rend='italic'>interim</hi> the Kirk of
<hi rend='italic'>Galowsheils</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. in favours of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>James Morison</hi> Minister at
<hi rend='italic'>Erne</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Randell</hi>, or his executors
for the payment of a sum of money by the next Intrant, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Recom. for planting Kirks in <hi rend='italic'>Badinach</hi> to the Commission for
planting of Kirks, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. to the Commission for publick affairs to think upon and prosecute some wayes
for planting a Ministry in <hi rend='italic'>Lochaber</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. to Presbyteries to send a more particular information of the insolencies
and miscarriages of the souldiers and the evidences thereof to the Commission for
publick affairs, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. to the Commit. of Bills to distribute the petitions for charity.
</p>

<p>
Recom. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Robert Lindsayes</hi> relick and Children, Sess. 18.
</p>

<p>
Recom. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Patrick Lindsayes</hi> children, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Paper from the Committee of Estates of the 28 of <hi rend='italic'>July</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. to Presbyteries to supply the places of the Brethren sent in Commission to
the General Assembly, or that attend the meetings of the Commission of
the Assembly, Sess. 19.
</p>

<p>
Act for conference with E of <hi rend='italic'>Abercorne</hi> until first of
<hi rend='italic'>March</hi>, Sess. 20.
</p>

<p>
Committee for considering the Hospitals, and to report their condition, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Commission for visiting, <hi rend='italic'>Rosse</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Sutherland</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Cathnes</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Orknay</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>Zetland</hi>, with a
Reference concerning Mr. <hi rend='italic'>James Johnston</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Commission for visitation of <hi rend='italic'>Stirling</hi>, and
<hi rend='italic'>Dunblane</hi> Presbyteries, with a Reference for the particular
concerning Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Andrew Jaffray</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. to the Commission for publick affairs for the trial of the Provincial Book
of <hi rend='italic'>Argyle</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act appointing the Clerk to print the Declaration with the first conveniency, and
to send it to Presbyteries, <hi rend='italic'>Sess.</hi> 22.
</p>

<p>
Vote for removing the Commissioners in the Province of
<hi rend='italic'>Galloway</hi> in the matter concerning Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>John Levingstons</hi> transportation to
<hi rend='italic'>Ancrum</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Declaration in favours of the Presbytery of <hi rend='italic'>Jedburgh</hi>, for
preserving their right and Interest in planting
<hi rend='italic'>Ancrum proprio Jure</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Transportation of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Leviston</hi> to
<hi rend='italic'>Ancrum</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Order for some Brethrens presenting the Declaration to the Committee of Estates, Sess. 23.
</p>

<p>
Ref. to the Committee appointed for publick matters to consider of the materials and
draught of a Petition to the Committee of Estates, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. for planting <hi rend='italic'>Kirkcaldie</hi> to the Commission for
publick affairs, Sess. 24.
</p>

<p>
Approbation of the manner and order of the calling and setling a Collegue
in the Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Culrosse</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Committee concerning Mr. <hi rend='italic'>James Row</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Committee for examining Witnesses upon the injury done to Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>Robert Melvill</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Committee for examining a scandalous Pamphlet fastly put forth under the name
of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Alexander Henderson</hi>, Sess. 25.
</p>

<p>
The Assemblies Answer Refusing the desire of the Isle of <hi rend='italic'>Makghie</hi>
in <hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi> for Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Dick</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Warrant for citing the persons that injured Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Robert Melvill</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Vote concerning <hi rend='italic'>Patrick Leslie</hi>, Sess. 27.
</p>

<p>
Approbation of the Excambion mentioned in the contract betwixt
<pb n="574"/><anchor id="Pg574"/>
Sir <hi rend='italic'>William Scot</hi> and the Minister of
<hi rend='italic'>Mertoun</hi> consented to by the Presbytery, and approven by
the Synod, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>William Home</hi> to the Visitation of
<hi rend='italic'>Dunse</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Chirnside</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Liberty for <hi rend='italic'>John Gillan</hi> to preach until the next
Assembly for exercise of his gift, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. concerning the Quere from the Presbytery of <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>,
touching the marriage of a young Gentlewoman minor without consent of her Tutors, to
a Committee, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act refusing the desire of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>James Row</hi> for opening his mouth. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Remit. the appeal of the Parishioners of <hi rend='italic'>Schots</hi>, concerning the
admission or Mr <hi rend='italic'>Francis Kincaid</hi> to the Presbytery and Synod
respectively of consent, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act refusing the transporting of Doctor <hi rend='italic'>Colvill</hi> to the Colledge
of <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Sess.</hi> 29.
</p>

<p>
Ref. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>William Sanders</hi> to the Commission for planting of
Kirks, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. dissent in the Presbytery of <hi rend='italic'>Chirnside</hi> to the visitation
of <hi rend='italic'>Dunse</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Chirnside</hi>, Sess. 30.
</p>

<p>
Act for conference with the Lady <hi rend='italic'>Mordington</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. to the Visitation of <hi rend='italic'>Dunse</hi> for tryal of that murther
committed in the Lord <hi rend='italic'>Mordingtons</hi> house.
</p>

<p>
Appointment of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Alexander Levingston</hi> to go to
<hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi> first, next Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Henry Semple</hi>, Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>Andrew Lawder</hi> in the third place, and Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John
Dick</hi> the last three Months, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. Some Brethren to speak again the Lord Theasurer for payment of by gones of
the annuity of 500 l. <hi rend='italic'>Sterling</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Vote for laying aside the question concerning Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Lawes</hi>
appeal. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. to a Committee to consider of some Overtures concerning Papists, and their
Children and Excommunicate persons and to report, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. to the Presbytery of <hi rend='italic'>Chirnside</hi>, concerning
<hi rend='italic'>Mordingtons</hi> Family. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act concerning <hi rend='italic'>Patrick Leslies</hi> acknowledgement and promise
of better behaviour, with a Reference to the Commission for publick affairs if
he keep not his promise, <hi rend='italic'>Sess.</hi> 31
</p>

<p>
Committee for considering the Petition of the great Session of
<hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi> for Ministers, and to report. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Continuation of the examination of the Directory of Government, and the CXI.
Propositions until the next Assembly, <hi rend='italic'>Sess.</hi> 32.
</p>

<p>
Recom. to Universities to bring to the next Assembly the grounds and
evidences of their Commissions to Assemblies, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Commission for Visitation of <hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Commission for Visitation of <hi rend='italic'>Aberdeen</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Commission for Visitation of <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Letter to the Officers of the Army now in <hi rend='italic'>England</hi> in Answer
to their Letter and Petition to the Assembly for Ministers, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Act reponing Mr. <hi rend='italic'>William Dowglas</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Act reponing Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Logie</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Recom. certain persons for charity. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Act for delaying the communion, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Recom. for repairing of Kirks, and founding of Schools in the Presbytery of
<hi rend='italic'>Sky</hi>, Sess. 33.
</p>

<p>
Continuation of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Andrew Ramsay</hi>, until the morne,
<hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Suspension of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Andrew Ramsay</hi>, until the next General
Assembly. <hi rend='italic'>Sess.</hi> 34.
</p>

<pb n="575"/><anchor id="Pg575"/>

<p>
Ref. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>William Colvill</hi> to a conference, and they to report.
<hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Citation of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>William Colvill apud acta</hi> to answer for
not reading the Causes of the late Fast, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Ref. Doctor <hi rend='italic'>John Baron</hi> to a conference, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Recom. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>George Clerk</hi> to the Presbyteries within
<hi rend='italic'>Fife</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Angus</hi>, and
<hi rend='italic'>Merns</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Aberdeen</hi> Sess. 35.
</p>

<p>
Commission for Visitation of the University of St. <hi rend='italic'>Andrews</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act for visiting Hospitals and Mortifications, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Recom. to the Provincial of <hi rend='italic'>Argyle</hi> to visit the Presbytery of
<hi rend='italic'>Sky</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Advise to the Presbyterie to depose Mr. <hi rend='italic'>William Edmiston</hi> with
a Recommendation to the Justice to proceed against him for Adultery. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. to the Presbyterie of <hi rend='italic'>Sky</hi> to censure Profanation of
the Sabbath. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Approbation of the report for planting of the Kirks of
<hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Sess.</hi> XXXVI.
</p>

<p>
Committee for naming a List of six Ministers for <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Vote concerning Mr. <hi rend='italic'>William Colvill</hi>, answering presently for not
reading the Causes of the Fast. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Continuation of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>William Colvils</hi> untill the morn, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Continuation of Doctor <hi rend='italic'>Baron</hi> untill the morn, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Continuation of the 20. S. payed out of every Kirk for dispatches. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Suspension of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>William Colvill</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>Sess.</hi> XXXVII.
</p>

<p>
Suspension of Doctor <hi rend='italic'>Baron</hi> with a Reference to the Visitation
of the Universitie of St. <hi rend='italic'>Andrews</hi> and Commission for
publick affairs respectively. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. of the Minister of <hi rend='italic'>Cameron</hi> to the Commission of
Parliament for planting of Kirks. <hi rend='italic'>Sess.</hi> XXXVIII.
</p>

<p>
Recommendation to Master <hi rend='italic'>James Hamiltoun</hi> and Master
<hi rend='italic'>James Guthrie</hi> to draw in Articles the duties of Elders, and
a forme of Visitation of Families, and to prepare a report to the next Assembly. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. to Mr. <hi rend='italic'>David Calderwood</hi> to draw a draught of a
form of visitation of particular Congregations, and to prepare a report to the
next Assembly. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. to Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Smith</hi> and the Clerk, to draw out all the
Acts of Parliament and Assembly, for Kirk discipline and Penalties for scandalous Sins,
and to report to the next Assembly. Ib.
</p>

<p>
List of six Ministers to <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. to the Commission for publick affairs to plant four Ministers out of the said
List in the Kirks of <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Declaration of the unsatisfactoriness of the Observations of the Committee of Estates
upon the Assemblies Declaration, with a Reference to the Commission for publick affairs,
to put forth an Answer thereto. <hi rend='italic'>Sess.</hi> 39.
</p>

<p>
Appointment of the first dyet of Citations in the matter of
<hi rend='italic'>transportations</hi> not to be before the last
<hi rend='italic'>Wednesday</hi> of <hi rend='italic'>October</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
The Assemblies Answer to a Quere from the Presbytery of <hi rend='italic'>Elgin</hi>,
concerning the transporting from the <hi rend='italic'>Highlands</hi> a Minister to
the <hi rend='italic'>Low lands</hi>, Sess. 40.
</p>

<p>
Letter to their Brethren in <hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Letter to the Lord Chancellor, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Indiction of a Fast on the second Sabbath of <hi rend='italic'>September</hi>, with
the causes thereof. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. concerning Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Hew Henderson</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. for the people in <hi rend='italic'>Libberton</hi> to repair to the Kirk
of <hi rend='italic'>Quodquen</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<pb n="576"/><anchor id="Pg576"/>

<p>
Recom. to the Parliament for dissolution of the benefice of
<hi rend='italic'>Kinkell</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act for proceeding against Captain <hi rend='italic'>Maxwell</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>John Somervail</hi> and Coronet <hi rend='italic'>Weir</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. for planting in <hi rend='italic'>Innerness</hi> another Minister that hath the
<hi rend='italic'>Irish</hi> tongue, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Recom. for planting a Kirk in <hi rend='italic'>Gladsmore</hi>, and that some
Brethren speak to the E. <hi rend='italic'>Hadington</hi> that by his pretence to the
Patronage he do not obstruct so good a work, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Remit. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Law</hi> to the Provincial of
<hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. concerning Mr. <hi rend='italic'>James Aitkin</hi> to the visitation of
<hi rend='italic'>Ross</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Caithnes</hi>, &amp;c. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Donald Ross</hi> Minister at <hi rend='italic'>Lochbroom</hi>
to the said visitation, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Duncan</hi> to the said Visitation, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. to the Presbytery of <hi rend='italic'>Dingwall</hi> concerning Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>Murdo Mackenzie</hi> late Minister at <hi rend='italic'>Suddie</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act declaring Mr <hi rend='italic'>Murdo Mackenzie</hi> late Minister at
<hi rend='italic'>Dingwall</hi> uncapable for ever of the Ministry with a Recommendation
to the Presbytery to proceed against him with Excommunication, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Deposition Mr. <hi rend='italic'>William Couper</hi> School-master at
<hi rend='italic'>Chanrie</hi> from that charge, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Continuation of the matter concerning Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Rosse</hi> at
<hi rend='italic'>Lunsaman</hi>, to the next Assembly, <hi rend='italic'>Sess. Ult.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Act Ordaining the Presbytery of <hi rend='italic'>Elgin</hi> to proceed against Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>Thomas Gilzean</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>John Gordon</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Francis Omey</hi> to the Provincial of
<hi rend='italic'>Perth</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Refusal of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>George Hannays</hi> desire, and his censure for his
miscarriage. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Recom. in favours of his wife and children. <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Recom. concerning the Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Mordington</hi>, to the visitation of
<hi rend='italic'>Dunse</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Chirnside</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. to the Provinces of <hi rend='italic'>Aberdeen</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Angus</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Murray</hi> to supply the vaking
Kirks in <hi rend='italic'>Badenoch</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Lochaber</hi>, &amp;c.
respectively in their own bounds, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. of Sir <hi rend='italic'>Lachlan Mackean</hi> to the Commission for publick affairs,
Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ordinance for the Presbytery of <hi rend='italic'>Sky</hi> to proceed with
Excommunication against Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Lachlane Fraser</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. Concerning the particulars given in by Mr. <hi rend='italic'>James Moreson</hi>
against the Presbytery of <hi rend='italic'>Kirkwall</hi> to the visitation
<hi rend='italic'>Rosse</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Caithnes</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Renovation of the Commission of the preceeding Assembly in
<hi rend='italic'>Sess.</hi> 26 concerning Witchcraft. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recommendation Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Alexander Mackean</hi> to Presbyteries and
Universities for a Bursar and particularly to the Presbytery of
<hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act concerning the tryal of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>William Home</hi> and Citing
of Witnesses, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Commission to Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Pringill</hi> and Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>John Strachan</hi> to examine Witnesses in that matter, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. to the Commissioners of the Presbytery of <hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi> for
sending to the Clerk an exact report of the condition of their Kirks, with their
provisions, the extent of Parishes, and number of Parishoners, <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Act for intimating the Visitation of <hi rend='italic'>Dunse</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Chirnside</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recommendation Mr. <hi rend='italic'>William Douglas</hi> to the Committee of Estates. Ib.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="577"/><anchor id="Pg577"/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head><hi rend='italic'>INDEX of the Unprinted ACTS of the
Assembly.</hi> 1649.</head>

<p>
Election of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Robert Douglas</hi> Moderator, Sess. 1.
</p>

<p>
Act concerning the Commission from <hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi>, Ibid.
</p>

<p>
Committee for Refers and Appeals, Sess. 2.
</p>

<p>
Committee for Bills and Overtures, Ibid.
</p>

<p>
Committee for publick business, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Committee for tryall of the Synod Books, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Committee for the tryall of the proceedings of the Commissioners of the Generall
Assembly, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Renovation of the Commission for visiting the University of
<hi rend='italic'>Saint Andrews</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. <hi rend='italic'>Gedeon Morise</hi> to the Committee of Estates. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Order for speaking the Earle of <hi rend='italic'>Abercorne</hi> for payment of
the begone stipends of <hi rend='italic'>Kilpatrick</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. business of <hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi> to the Committee for publick
business, Sess. 3.
</p>

<p>
Continuation of Generall Major <hi rend='italic'>Midleton</hi> to the 9 of July, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Committee for the Psalmes, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. of the Protestation of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>James Morison</hi> to the
Committee of Refers, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act Concerning the papers comitted by the Parliament for correspondence, Sess. 4.
</p>

<p>
Continuation of particular References from the Commission of the General Assembly
until the report thereof be brought in from the Committee of Refers, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Committee for considering the Earle of <hi rend='italic'>Egligtouns</hi> Bill
concerning Mr. <hi rend='italic'>James Ferguson</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Comittee for conference with the Committee of dispatches, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Committee for conference with Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Walter Comrie</hi> to satisfie
him in his transportation to <hi rend='italic'>Inneraray</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Continuation of the Lord <hi rend='italic'>Ogilvy</hi> to the 17 of that instant, Sess. 5.
</p>

<p>
Continuation of G. M. <hi rend='italic'>Midleton</hi> untill fryday next, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Letter to the Brethren of the Presbytrie of <hi rend='italic'>Carrickfergus</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Continuation of the Commission for visitation of the University of
<hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ratification of the act of the Presbytery of St. <hi rend='italic'>Andrews</hi>
concerning the agreement betwixt the Laird of <hi rend='italic'>Anstruther</hi>
and the Parochiners, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act recommending to the Brethren to make out the descriptions of these parts
of the Kingdom not yet described. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Remitt. <hi rend='italic'>Elizabeth Armestrange</hi> to the Province of
<hi rend='italic'>Drumfries</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act for a Minister to Colonel <hi rend='italic'>Gilbert Ker</hi> his Regiment, Sess. 6.
</p>

<p>
Recom. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Robert Jamesone</hi> to the Parliament, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Letter from <hi rend='italic'>Rivet</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Order for presenting to the Parliament the report of the Commissioners sent
to his Majestie, and for printing thereof, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Committee for revising a Tract of Chronologie, Sess. 7.
</p>

<p>
Committee for considering the Petition of the Town of <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>
for Ministers and Professors, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Approbation of the act of transportation concerning Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>Walter Comrie</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Committee for corecting the paraphrase the Psalmes, Ib.
</p>

<pb n="578"/><anchor id="Pg578"/>

<p>
Ref. to the Committee of publick business to consider the petitions given in
by the Engagers, and report, Sess. 8.
</p>

<p>
Committee for appointing Ministers to preach, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. concerning the Minister of <hi rend='italic'>Giencorse</hi> to the
parliament and Exchequer, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Approbation of the sentence of decision against M. <hi rend='italic'>Harie
Guthrie</hi> notwithstanding of his appeal, Sess. 9.
</p>

<p>
Approbation of the Depositions of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Allane</hi>,
Mr <hi rend='italic'>Andrew Jeffrey</hi> and Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Harie Schaw</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Approbation of the depositions of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Alexander Monroe</hi>, Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>David Menroe</hi> and Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Thomas Ross</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Approbation of the Suspensions of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Donald Ross</hi>, Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>Willam Rosse</hi>, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Hosack</hi>: with
the Ref. concerning Mr. <hi rend='italic'>David Ross</hi>, Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>Robert Williamson</hi>, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Walter Sewart</hi>,
Mr. <hi rend='italic'>George Monroe</hi> and Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Andrew Anderson</hi>
to the next visitation, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Deposition of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Patrick Graham</hi> somtime Minister at
<hi rend='italic'>Holme</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Committee for conference with the Officers that were upon the Engagement, Sess. 10.
</p>

<p>
Recom. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Alexander Smith</hi> for stipend to the Parliament, Sess. 11.
</p>

<p>
Deposition Mr. <hi rend='italic'>James Aitkin</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Admonition to the visitation of Ross, Sess. 12.
</p>

<p>
Act for laying aside the Commission from the Presbytrie
of <hi rend='italic'>Orknay</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Order for General Major <hi rend='italic'>Midleton</hi> appearing with certification, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Order for citation of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Andrew Ramsay</hi> and Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>William Colvill</hi>, Ses. 13.
</p>

<p>
Ref. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Edward Wright</hi> and Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Andre Keir</hi>
to their Presbytries, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>George Haliburton</hi> and Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>Archibald Drumond</hi> to the visitation of
<hi rend='italic'>Stirling</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Dumblane</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. to the Commission for publick affaires concerning the providing a Collegue to
the Minister of <hi rend='italic'>Air</hi>, Ses. 14.
</p>

<p>
Order for citing the witnesses in the matter of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Thomas Ramsay</hi>
elder, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Reposition of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>William Cowper</hi> to the office of Schoolmaster
in <hi rend='italic'>Channerie</hi>, Ses. 15.
</p>

<p>
Approbation of the Deposition of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>James Lundie</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act and Ref. concerning Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Walter Swinton</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. Concerning Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Patrick Smith</hi>, and approbation of
his suspension, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act and Ref. concerning Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Home</hi> for the farther tryall, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Approbation of the suspension concerning Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Ja. Edgar</hi> and
Ref. concerning him, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Deposition of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Andro Rollock</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>William Sinclair</hi> to the visitation of
<hi rend='italic'>Dunse</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. concerning M. <hi rend='italic'>William Home</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Approbation of the diligence of the visiters of <hi rend='italic'>Dunse</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Chirneside</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Committee to meet with the committee of Parliament for considering and revising the
proceedings of the visitation of Saint <hi rend='italic'>Andrews</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Continuation of the business concerning Mr. <hi rend='italic'>James Durhames</hi>
transportation till the morne, Ses. 16.
</p>

<p>
Recom. for incarcerating one delated for witchcraft, Sess. 17.
</p>

<p>
Committee for conference with the Lord <hi rend='italic'>Ogilby</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<pb n="579"/><anchor id="Pg579"/>

<p>
Recom. officers come from <hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Committee for conference with the Earle of <hi rend='italic'>Galloway</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. <hi rend='italic'>Helen Gordoun</hi> to the Parliament, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Answer to the Petition given in for the Earles of <hi rend='italic'>Damfermling</hi>
and <hi rend='italic'>Lauderdalie</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. of the Relick of umquhile Dr. <hi rend='italic'>Sharpe</hi> to the Parliament, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Logie</hi> to the Synod, Ses. 18.
</p>

<p>
Committee for presenting overtures and desires to the Parliament, concerning the
Moss troopers, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Committee for considering Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Alexander Smiths</hi> condition, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. Liev. <hi rend='italic'>Col. Ker</hi> to his Presbyterie, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. concerning <hi rend='italic'>Pitfoddells</hi> younger,
<hi rend='italic'>Urquhart</hi> of Old Craig and <hi rend='italic'>Thomas Menzies</hi>
to the visitation of <hi rend='italic'>Angus</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Merns</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. Sir <hi rend='italic'>John Weyme</hi> of <hi rend='italic'>Bogie</hi> to his
Presbyterie, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. Sir <hi rend='italic'>John Makenzie</hi> and Lieutenant Collonel
<hi rend='italic'>David Weymes</hi> to their Presbyterie, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. <hi rend='italic'>Thomas Rutherfurd</hi> to his Presbyterie, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. Liev. <hi rend='italic'>Will. Sutherland</hi> to his Presbytery, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. <hi rend='italic'>Andrew Wardlaw</hi> to the Presbytery of
<hi rend='italic'>Kirkcadie</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. certain persons accessory to the late unlawful engagment to their Presbytries.
</p>

<p>
Ref. <hi rend='italic'>Argustine Hofeman</hi> to the Presbytery of
<hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. <hi rend='italic'>Hary Stuart</hi> to the Presb. of <hi rend='italic'>Edinb.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Ref. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Edward Wright</hi> M. <hi rend='italic'>Andrew Keir</hi>
and M. <hi rend='italic'>Robert Keyte</hi> to the Presbyterie of
<hi rend='italic'>Linlithgow</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>James Guthrie</hi> in <hi rend='italic'>Angus</hi>, Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>Thos. Paterson</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Silvester Lamie</hi>
to the visitation of <hi rend='italic'>Angus</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>George Halyburton</hi> and Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Arch.
Drummond</hi> to the visitation of <hi rend='italic'>Stirling</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Dumblane</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. the division of <hi rend='italic'>Libberton</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Quodqhen</hi> to the Presbytrie of <hi rend='italic'>Biggar</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Crichton</hi> to the Presbyterie of
<hi rend='italic'>Glasgow</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Paislay</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. the Laird of <hi rend='italic'>Kelhead</hi> to his Presbyterie, Sess. 19.
</p>

<p>
Ref. the Laird of <hi rend='italic'>Innes</hi> younger to the Presbytrie of
<hi rend='italic'>Taine</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Commission to the Presbyterie of <hi rend='italic'>Kelso</hi> for examining
<hi rend='italic'>Margery Ker</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. to the Parliament of the Petition of the Commissioners of
<hi rend='italic'>Argyle</hi> Ses. 20.
</p>

<p>
Act appointing some brethren to assist <hi rend='italic'>John Greirson</hi> in
discussing his suspension, Ib.
</p>

<p>
The Assemblies addition and their judgement concerning the Petitions which were
to have been presented to the last G. Assembly, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act declaring Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Alexander Smith</hi> to be transportable, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Committee for the collectors accompts and <hi rend='italic'>Alex Blairs</hi> bill, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act refuting the transportation of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>James Durham</hi> to
<hi rend='italic'>Edinb.</hi> Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. E. of <hi rend='italic'>Galloway</hi> to his Presbyterie, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. Major <hi rend='italic'>Alexander Forbes</hi> to the Presbyterie of
<hi rend='italic'>Kincardin</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. Col. <hi rend='italic'>David Barklay</hi> to the Commission for
publick affairs. Sess. 21.
</p>

<p>
Committee for considering the matter concerning the transportation of Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>Neill Cameron</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Report from the Committee of appeals concerning Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Hay</hi>
his taking up of his appellation, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Deposition Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Alexander Keyth</hi>. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. E. of <hi rend='italic'>Queensberie</hi> to his Presbytrie, Ses. 22.
</p>

<p>
Committee to confer with Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Patrick
<pb n="580"/><anchor id="Pg580"/>
Hamiltoun</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act concerning Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Patrick Hamiltoun</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. for assisting the petition of the people of <hi rend='italic'>Athbole</hi>
for dividing Paroches and planting of Kirks, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Committee for preparing a report in the matter concerning G. M.
<hi rend='italic'>Midleton</hi>, Ses. 23.
</p>

<p>
Act for citing the E. of <hi rend='italic'>Abercorne</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Committee for conference with Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Hary Guthrie</hi>, Ses. 25.
</p>

<p>
Approbation of the report of the Committee appointed to revise the proceedings of
the visitation of the university of Saint <hi rend='italic'>Andrews</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. D. <hi rend='italic'>Barron</hi> and Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Thomas Glaggé</hi>
to the Presbyterie of St. <hi rend='italic'>Andrews</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Thomas Ross</hi> to the Presb. of
<hi rend='italic'>Dingwall</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Warrand for printing a Tract of Chronologie, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. of the Petition to the Parliament for erecting the Kirks of
<hi rend='italic'>Fairnie</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. of the Petition of D. <hi rend='italic'>Sharps</hi> Relick to the Parliament, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Harie Cockburne</hi> to his Presbyterie. Ib.
</p>

<p>
Order from citing of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Andrew Ramsay</hi> and Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>William Colvill</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act for visiting the Hospitalls and Mortifications, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. of the petition of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Robert Scot</hi> Minister at
<hi rend='italic'>Ettleston</hi> to the Commission for planting of Kirks, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. concerning the disuniting of the paroch of <hi rend='italic'>Abirchirdar</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. for the matter concerning the transportation of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Neill
Cameron</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act sustaining the Appeal of the Parochiners of <hi rend='italic'>Northberwick</hi>
with an order for citing the Minister and parochiners of <hi rend='italic'>Baro</hi>
to answer in the cause, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. Earle of <hi rend='italic'>Abercorne</hi> to the Presbyterie of
<hi rend='italic'>Paislay</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Continuation of the matter concerning Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Andrew Ramsay</hi> till the
morne, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Continuation of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>William Colvil</hi> till the Morn. ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. of the petition of the town of <hi rend='italic'>Couper</hi> to
the Commission for planting of Kirks. Sess. 26.
</p>

<p>
Recom. the Officers come from <hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi> to the honorable
Estates of Parliament, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Deposition of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Graham</hi> sometime Minister at
<hi rend='italic'>Auchterardor</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Approbation of the sentence of Deposition of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>David Drummond</hi>
sometime Minister at <hi rend='italic'>Lithgow</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Nairne</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act for giving in the appeals and References to the Assembly, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Approbation of the report concerning the Collectors accompts, Ses. 27.
</p>

<p>
Act in favours of <hi rend='italic'>Alex. Blaire</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act for giving up Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Hary Guthries</hi> appeal upon his
desire to cancel the same, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Continuation of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Andrew Ramsayes</hi> business till the morne, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Deposition of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>William Colvill</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Intimation if any doubt upon the Declaration, to come to the committee, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Order for Writing a letter to Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Theodor Haack</hi> for hasting
forth the Dutch Annotations upon the Bible, Sess. 28.
</p>

<p>
Deposition Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Andrew Ramsay</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Commission for visitation of the University of <hi rend='italic'>Aberdeen</hi>, Sess. 29.
</p>

<p>
Recom. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Gilbert Mershel</hi> for a competent maintenance, to
the Commission for planting of Kirks, Ib.
</p>

<pb n="581"/><anchor id="Pg581"/>

<p>
Recom. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>George Clerk</hi> for a charitable supplie, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Commission for visitation of the university of Saint <hi rend='italic'>Andrews</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. to the Commission for publick affairs for planting the place of the provest
of the old colledge of Saint <hi rend='italic'>Andrews</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Committee for examining witnesses in the matter concerning Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>Tho: Ramsay</hi>, with an order for citing witnesses not appearing, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act in favours of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>William Dowglas</hi>, Sess. 30.
</p>

<p>
Act appointing Ministers to preach in <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi> during
the sitting of the Assembly, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>James Affleck</hi> to the visitation of
<hi rend='italic'>Angus</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Merns</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Committee for considering the petition of the Town of <hi rend='italic'>Stirling</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act in favours of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Thomas Ireland</hi> Minister at
<hi rend='italic'>Weyme</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act permitting <hi rend='italic'>John Gillan</hi> to exercise his gift publickly, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Commission for visiting the Colledge of <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. to the Parliament for reparation of the losses of Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>Alexander Ferreis</hi>, Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Robert Jameson</hi>
and Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Keyth</hi>, Sess. 31.
</p>

<p>
Ref. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Richard Maitland</hi> to the visitation of the
universitie of <hi rend='italic'>Aberdeene</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act in the matter concerning the Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Dairsoy</hi>, Sess. 32.
</p>

<p>
Remitt. the matter concerning <hi rend='italic'>James Ross Banneil</hi> to the
Presbyterie, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act exeeming the Presbyterie of <hi rend='italic'>Dunkeld</hi> from payment of the
fortie shillings for the highland boyes, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. <hi rend='italic'>John Maxwell</hi> younger of <hi rend='italic'>Calderwood</hi>
to the Presb. of <hi rend='italic'>Hamilton</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. of the Earle of <hi rend='italic'>Athols</hi> bill for planting the Kirk
of <hi rend='italic'>Dunkeld</hi> to the visitation of the Presbyterie of
<hi rend='italic'>Dunkeld</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Commission for visitation of <hi rend='italic'>Ross</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Sutherland</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>Caithnes</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Commission for visitation of <hi rend='italic'>Stirling</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Dumblane</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Commission for visitation of <hi rend='italic'>Angus</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Merns</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Commission for visitation of <hi rend='italic'>Dunse</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Chirnsyde</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Continuation of the matter concerning the transportation of Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>John Stirling</hi> to <hi rend='italic'>Northberwick</hi> till
the morne, Sess. 33.
</p>

<p>
Approbation of the sentence of deposition of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>William Wilkie</hi>,
Sess. 34
</p>

<p>
Suspension of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Robert Balcanquel</hi> with Ref. to the Commiss.
for publick affaires, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. <hi rend='italic'>Helene Ersken</hi> to the Parliament for charitable supplie, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Reposition of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Marten Makilwrae</hi>, with a Recommendation to the
Synod of <hi rend='italic'>Argyle</hi> to settle him in some charge in the Ministery, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. my Lord <hi rend='italic'>Cochrane</hi> to the Commission for publick affairs,
Sess. 35.
</p>

<p>
Ref. of the petition of <hi rend='italic'>James Sanders</hi> to the visitation of
hospitals, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act in favours of <hi rend='italic'>Violet Dauling</hi> spouse to
Mr. <hi rend='italic'>George Hannay</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act refusing the transportation of Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Stirling</hi> to
<hi rend='italic'>Northberwick</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. to the Commission for publick affaires for planting the Kirk of
<hi rend='italic'>Northberwick</hi> Ib.
</p>

<p>
Committee for conference with the Earl of <hi rend='italic'>Linlithgow</hi>, Sess. 36.
</p>

<p>
Ref. of the Articles of election of Ministers to the Committee for publick business with
intimation to all that have objection, to come there, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act in favours of <hi rend='italic'>Mary Hay</hi> spouse to Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>Richard Maitland</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Alexander Monroe</hi> to the visitation of
<hi rend='italic'>Ross</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<pb n="582"/><anchor id="Pg582"/>

<p>
Recom. for Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Alexander Monroe</hi> his three hundred marks of
augmentation, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Thomas Ramsay</hi> to the visitation of
<hi rend='italic'>Dunse</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Chirnside</hi>, with continuation of
his suspension in the meane time, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Commission for visitation of the Kirks in the Highland, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Commission for visitation of <hi rend='italic'>Dunkeld</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recomen. <hi rend='italic'>Janet Andrew</hi> to the Parliament, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Rosse</hi> to the Presbytery of
<hi rend='italic'>Kincardin</hi> for supplie out of the vacand stipends, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Order for presenting the Declaration to the Parliament and for desiring that the
Acts given in may be passed, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act concerning <hi rend='italic'>Kircurds</hi> passing from his appeal, and a
recommendation to the Presbyterie of <hi rend='italic'>Peebles</hi> for farther
dealing with him, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Petition to the Parliament in favours of the Laird of
<hi rend='italic'>Glenurghae</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Petition in behalfe of Doctor <hi rend='italic'>Sharps</hi> Relick to the Parliament, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Letter to their Brethren in <hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi>, Sess. 37.
</p>

<p>
Committee for conference with General Major <hi rend='italic'>Midleton</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. certain persons accessory to the late unlawful engagment to the
Commission for publick Affairs, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. <hi rend='italic'>Alexander Urquhart</hi> of <hi rend='italic'>Craighouse</hi>
to the visitation of <hi rend='italic'>Rosse</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. <hi rend='italic'>Agnes Maxwell</hi> for a charitable supplie to the Parliament,
Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. for planting the Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Kircaldie</hi>, Sess. 28.
</p>

<p>
Ref. Earl of <hi rend='italic'>Linlithgow</hi> to his Presbyterie, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. for planting the Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Linlithgow</hi> to the Commission
for publick affaires, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. for planting the Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Stirling</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. for planting the Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Dunse</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. for planting the vaiking Kirkes of <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi> and
the vaiking places of the Professors of divinitie there, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. for planting the Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Dunkeld</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref to the Commission for publick affaires concerning the education of the
Earle of <hi rend='italic'>Athole</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Colin Mackenzie</hi> and Mr. <hi rend='italic'>David
Monroe</hi> to the Visitation of <hi rend='italic'>Rosse</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act for collecting the history of these latter times, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. of persons for charitie, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. <hi rend='italic'>Julian Wilkie</hi> for charitie, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. concerning the Kirk of <hi rend='italic'>Bervie</hi> to the
Commission for planting of Kirks, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act for writing to Universities for prosecuting the course of Philosophie, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Robert Jamesone</hi> for some supplie out
of the vaiking stipends, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. concerning the adjoining the paroch of <hi rend='italic'>Mouthhill</hi> to the
parish of <hi rend='italic'>Slasse</hi> to the Presbyteries of
<hi rend='italic'>Strabogy</hi> &amp; <hi rend='italic'>Fordice</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. concerning the dividing of the paroch of <hi rend='italic'>Turro</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. <hi rend='italic'>Lewis Gordon</hi> to the Commission for publick affairs, Sess. 39.
</p>

<p>
Ref. <hi rend='italic'>William Innes</hi> of <hi rend='italic'>Tippertae</hi> to the
Presbyterie of <hi rend='italic'>Allane</hi> to be relaxed, ib.
</p>

<p>
Petition to the Parliament concerning exacting Oathes in the cases of custome
&amp; excise, Sess. 40.
</p>

<p>
Commission for visitation of <hi rend='italic'>Rosse</hi>, ib.
</p>

<p>
Commission for visitation of <hi rend='italic'>Orkneay</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Zetland</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Southerland</hi>, and
<hi rend='italic'>Caithnes</hi>, ib.
</p>

<p>
Act concerning the payment of <hi rend='italic'>Ja: Murrays</hi> dues, ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. to Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John Smith</hi> and Mr. <hi rend='italic'>James
Hammilton</hi> to draw some

<pb n="583"/><anchor id="Pg583"/>
articles concerning the duties of Elders, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. Viscount of <hi rend='italic'>Kenmure</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. Doctor <hi rend='italic'>Strange</hi>. Sess. 41.
</p>

<p>
Ref. concerning the modification of <hi rend='italic'>Alexander Gutherie</hi> to
the visitation of <hi rend='italic'>Angus</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Merns</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act and Recom. to the Magistrates of <hi rend='italic'>Edinb.</hi> for repairing
of the Assembly house, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. to the Commission for publick affaires to provide some way for
Ministers to say prayers to the Lords of Session, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. to Commission for publick affaires for providing a Minister to the Castell
of <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Directory for election of Ministers, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>George Hannay</hi> to the Commission for publick affaires, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. and Recom. to the Commission for satisfying the paines of the writer, of
the paraphrase of the Psalms, Sess. 42.
</p>

<p>
Ref. concerning G. M. <hi rend='italic'>Midleton</hi> to the commission
for publick affaires, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act. concerning the University of St. <hi rend='italic'>Andrews</hi> during
the vacation of the Provests place of the old Colledge, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. to the Presbyteries in the North to count with the Laird of
<hi rend='italic'>Eight</hi> upon the fines of excommunicate persons to be
applyed to pious uses and to report to the next Assembly, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. appointing Ministers for the Army, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. <hi rend='italic'>Rorie Mackenzie</hi> the visitation of
<hi rend='italic'>Roffe</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>William Colvills</hi> paper to the commission for
publick affaires, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. Presbyteries and Synods to send any informations they can give
concerning the passages of these times to the Moderator, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. for sending the contribution of 40 S. for the Highland boyes to the Collectors, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. to the visitors of <hi rend='italic'>Argyle</hi> for distribution of the money
formerly collected, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Exemption of <hi rend='italic'>Dunkeld</hi> of the Collection for
<hi rend='italic'>Argyle</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Act for continuation of the allowance for dispatches to the next Assembly, with a
Recom. for confering with my Lord Register and the Clerk about the person to be
employed in that charge, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. to the Commission for publick affaires concerning the setling of Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>John Menzies</hi> in the profession of Divinity at
<hi rend='italic'>Aberdene</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. for appointing a second Minister in <hi rend='italic'>Perth</hi> to the
Commission for publick affaires, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. and Recom. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>William Chalmers</hi> to the Synod of
<hi rend='italic'>Aberdeen</hi>, concerning the supply of his necessities, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Declaration concerning the Act granted in favours of Mr.
<hi rend='italic'>Richard Maitlands</hi> wife, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Ref. of the petition of the Earle of <hi rend='italic'>Sutherland</hi> in the name
of the Presbyterie of <hi rend='italic'>Sutherland</hi>, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. Mr. <hi rend='italic'>John</hi> Keyth to the Parliament, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. for dividing the paroch of <hi rend='italic'>Ferne</hi> to the
Commission for planting of Kirks, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. the disjoyning of the lands of over and nether
<hi rend='italic'>Dysert</hi> from <hi rend='italic'>Brichen</hi> to the Comission for
planting of Kirks, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Causes of a publick fast, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Commission for considering the obstructions of pietie and the remedies for removing
thereof, &amp;c to report to the next Assembly, Ib.
</p>

<p>
Recom. to the parliament for punishing counterfeit Testimonials, Ib.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>FINIS.</hi>
</p>
</div>
</body>
<back rend="page-break-before: right">
  <div id="footnotes">
    <index index="toc" />
    <index index="pdf" />
    <head>Footnotes</head>
    <divGen type="footnotes"/>
  </div>
  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <divGen type="pgfooter" />
  </div>
</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>
